The Project Gutenberg EBook of California Missions, by Karl Frederick Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: California Missions
       A Guide to the Historic Trails of the Padres

Author: Karl Frederick Brown

Release Date: November 11, 2017 [EBook #55931]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CALIFORNIA MISSIONS ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  [Illustration: _A Map Showing Location of the California Missions_]

  [Illustration: California Missions]

  [Illustration: Façade]




                         _California Missions_


              A GUIDE TO THE HISTORIC TRAILS OF THE PADRES

                            By KARL F. BROWN

               Illustrated with seventy-eight photographs
                              By FLOYD RAY

                              Foreword by
                            REXFORD NEWCOMB
                _Dean, College of Fine and Applied Arts
                        University of Illinois_

  [Illustration: Bell tower]

             COPYRIGHT 1939 BY KARL F. BROWN AND FLOYD RAY
                    GARDEN CITY PUBLISHING CO., Inc.
                                NEW YORK

  [Illustration: _Chapel, San Diego De Alcalá_]

  [Illustration: _Façade, San Diego De Alcalá_]




                               _Foreword_


Along the strand of the Pacific between San Diego and Sonoma, the
intrepid monks of the Order of Saint Francis strung that cordon of
missions that were to become, as time went on, the outposts of
civilization along the sunset coast of California.

Begun in 1769, this chain of churches along _El Camino Real_ was
complete by 1823, and in these establishments the devoted followers of
Padre Junípero Serra sought to win for Christ and the Crown of Spain
devotees among the dusky inhabitants of this land. How well they
succeeded may be judged when we learn that often in the more prosperous
missions as many as two thousand Indians were being trained at one time.

  [Illustration: _Cloister, San Diego De Alcalá_]

And what was the routine by which these fervent priests of Old Spain
hoped to convert the backward natives of the coast into God-fearing,
self-supporting and self-respecting subjects of his Hispanic majesty,
the king? The system of training prescribed plenty of work accompanied
by instruction in the handcrafts and Christian doctrine. To this end,
each day, the morning bell assembled the Indians in the chapel for
prayers and mass. Following this, breakfast was eaten, after which each
went to his assigned task. At eleven o’clock dinner was eaten; then a
siesta. Work, resumed at 2 P.M., continued until an hour before sunset,
when the Angelus recalled all to worship. After prayers and rosary,
supper was eaten, after which recreation ensued until early bedtime.

  [Illustration: _Bell Tower, San Diego De Alcalá_]

  [Illustration: _Bell Tower, San Antonio De Pala_]

This was the happy pattern of life that obtained in these picturesque
missions which at once comprised the early churches, the first schools,
the first factories and the work-a-day habitations of the priests and
their charges. Viewed in this light these old buildings become real
human documents and are therefore very precious to all interested in the
beginnings of civilization within our broad land.

  [Illustration: _Chapel, San Antonio De Pala_]

Through the glamor that time and an exotic origin have cast over these
old monuments, they continue to hold for us a fascination matched by
that of few American structures. And, in journeying to these historic
shrines, you will discover how these hard-headed priests, in sheltering
their converts, created in simplicity and strength a type of
architecture which considered from the standpoint of practical living,
climatic background, materials of construction and ethnic significance,
has rarely been equalled in any land. What a matchless artistic heritage
they have left us!

                                                         Rexford Newcomb
        _Dean, College of Fine and Applied Arts, University of Illinois_

  [Illustration: _Bell Tower From Garden San Antonio De Pala_]

  [Illustration: _San Luis Rey_]

  [Illustration: _Entrance, San Luis Rey_]

  [Illustration: Garden]

  [Illustration: _San Juan Capistrano_]




                         _California Missions_


San Diego was first visited by Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo in 1542, but it
was not until two hundred and twenty-seven years later that the fear
that Russia or England might take possession of California induced King
Carlos III of Spain to organize an expedition to colonize the land. It
was in 1769 that a band of about two hundred men set out by land and sea
to settle in Alta California. In the last company to come overland was
Padre Junípero Serra, who, although already advanced in age, had been
appointed _Padre Presidente_ of the missions. This extraordinary man
entered into a life of utmost hardship with a fiery enthusiasm that was
never dampened throughout his life, and to him we owe the chain of
historic missions that provide the only link to connect us with the
early life of California and Spain. Twenty-one of these were established
in California, forming an irregular line reaching from San Diego to
Sonoma, and connected by El Camino Real (The Royal Road). Today the
modern highway along the coast, U. S. 101, follows so closely the course
of this road established by the pioneers one hundred and seventy years
ago that one can easily say one is following in the footsteps of Father
Serra and his companions.

  [Illustration: _Ruins of Chapel, San Juan Capistrano_]

  [Illustration: _Inner Court, San Juan Capistrano_]

  [Illustration: _Bell Court Fountain_]

  [Illustration: _Mission Shops, San Juan Capistrano_]

  [Illustration: _Ruins of Cloister_]

  [Illustration: _Fountain Inner Court, San Juan Capistrano_]

On July 16th, 1769, sixteen days after his arrival in San Diego, Father
Serra established the first mission in California—the Mission San Diego
de Alcalá. The original site was unsatisfactory so a spot was later
chosen six miles back from the ocean in Mission Valley where the present
buildings now stand. San Diego was one of the wealthiest of the
missions. It had extensive orchards and vineyards, irrigated by an
aqueduct which brought water from the valley. Parts of the old mission
dam which was twelve feet thick, may still be seen. The olive trees
around the Mission form the mother orchard of all California mission
olives. The whole Mission has been restored in every detail. Its belfry,
one of the most magnificent of all the missions, is a three-story wall
pierced by five arches in which hang the old bells.

  [Illustration: _Entrance to Church, San Gabriel_]

  [Illustration: _Bell Tower, San Gabriel_]

Four miles inland from Oceanside, in a beautiful valley, stands Mission
San Luis Rey de Francia. The present buildings were started in 1811 by
Father Peyri, who managed the Mission for thirty years. It is now used
as a church and a Franciscan college. A feature not found in any other
mission is the mortuary chapel, a small octagonal shaped room off the
main chapel. San Luis Rey is typically Spanish in its architecture and
while not one of the most beautiful, it has a stately magnificence that
none of the other missions possesses.

  [Illustration: _Side Entrance to Chapel, San Gabriel_]

  [Illustration: _Façade, San Fernando Rey_]

  [Illustration: _Fountain, San Fernando Rey_]

  [Illustration: _Façade, Ventura_]

Twenty miles inland from Mission San Luis Rey stands San Antonio de
Pala, founded as an asistencia. In its chapel are Indian frescoes
covered for many years with a coat of whitewash given the wall by a
well-meaning padre. Its campanile, in which hang the original bells,
stands in the old cemetery. Pala, nestling at the base of the Palomar
Mountains, is a spot of enchanting beauty.

  [Illustration: _Side Door, Ventura_]

  [Illustration: _Chapel, Santa Barbara_]

The first attempt to found San Juan Capistrano was in 1775, but due to
an Indian uprising Father Lasuén was forced to return to San Diego. The
next year Father Serra came and established the Mission. It took nine
years to build and was the largest and most beautiful of all. In 1812
there was an earthquake that destroyed the buildings and killed forty
Indians who were worshiping in the chapel. All of the buildings have
been rebuilt except the chapel, of which one of the seven large domes
still stands in its lonely grandeur, a delight to the artist.
Capistrano, elaborately decorated and artistically constructed, is
sometimes called “Jewel of the Missions.”

  [Illustration: _Façade, Santa Barbara_]

  [Illustration: _General View, Santa Barbara_]

San Gabriel Arcángel was a welcomed pause in the long journey from
Mexico to Monterey; it was the first stop after crossing the desert and
mountains. It is distinctively Moorish in its architecture. Its high
buttressed walls are stone to the windows and brick above and have an
outside stairway to the choir loft and campanile. In the courtyard is
one of the largest and oldest grape vines in California.

  [Illustration: _Doorway_]

  [Illustration: _Altar, Santa Barbara_]

  [Illustration: _Detail of Cloister_]

At one time Mission San Fernando Rey de España had an Indian population
of eleven hundred. Today nothing remains of the Mission but one large
building. In it one can see the wine cellar and the large copper brandy
still. Across the street is a large star-shaped fountain copied from one
in Cordova, Spain, a monument to the artistic work of the Indians.

  [Illustration: _Detail of Façade, Santa Barbara_]

Half-way between San Diego and Monterey, Father Serra founded the
Mission Buenaventura. It was the last founded by him. On a hill above
the mission he planted a cross that could be seen from both land and
sea. Today, a replica of the cross stands in the same place. Ventura was
noted for its beautiful gardens but of these nothing remains except two
tall palms. The chapel has been restored and is used daily as a place of
worship.

  [Illustration: _Side Door Detail_]

  [Illustration: _Cloister, Santa Inez_]

  [Illustration: _Detail of Façade_]

  [Illustration: _Detail of Cloister_]

  [Illustration: _Chapel, Santa Inez_]

Mission Santa Bárbara has never fallen into a state of decay like its
less fortunate sister missions, as it has always been in the hands of
its founders, the Franciscans. Although damaged by numerous earthquakes,
the last in 1925, it has always been faithfully restored. The light
above the altar has never gone out, the old bells have faithfully rung
the call to Mass. Its walls, six feet thick and mellowed by time, impart
a lasting beauty. The bodies of over four thousand Indians lie in its
tree-shadowed cemetery. In front of the Mission the trickling water from
an old fountain gives one the restful feeling of the old Spanish siesta.
It was at this mission that the great historian, Father Engelhardt,
wrote his great book, “Missions and Missionaries of California.”

  [Illustration: _La Purisima_]

Mission Santa Inéz was founded to convert the Indians who lived east of
the Coast Range. The Mission not only suffered from earthquakes but also
from an Indian uprising. Today it has been restored to its former
grandeur. Its campanile with its three bells reminds one of Mission San
Gabriel. In its museum is a collection of old vestments and books.

Nothing remained of Mission La Purísima Conceptión but a few crumbling
arches, till it was taken over by the state. Today it stands in all its
former glory, faithfully restored in every detail. The Mission site was
made a State park and the restoration carried out by the Civilian
Conservation Corps. Purísima stands as a monument to a nation’s
industry, but lacks the peaceful state of religious tranquility found in
the other missions.

  [Illustration: _Restored Interior, La Purisima_]

  [Illustration: _Detail at end of Cloister La Purisima_]

  [Illustration: _San Luis Obispo_]

It was at Mission San Luis Obispo de Tolosa that tile was first
manufactured. The buildings have lost much of their Spanish atmosphere,
but the interior is in a fair state of restoration. It is now the active
Catholic Church of the city which was named after it. A few miles from
San Luis Obispo is the Asistencia of Santa Margarita, unique in that the
entire ruins have been covered over by a large hay barn. Horses and
cattle quietly munch their hay through the arched window openings.

  [Illustration: _Sacristy, San Miguel_]

  [Illustration: _San Miguel_]

The very walls of San Miguel Arcángel, due to its sympathetic
restoration, seem to echo the footsteps of the old padres. Inside the
chapel the huge rafters, crudely hewn from logs, are painted in bright
colors. The design painted on the walls by the Indians show large fluted
pillars with a balcony and railing above. The floor is of burned brick,
worn smooth by the tread of bare feet. Its crudely decorated pulpit and
confessional are the same as the day they were built. The Mission did
not have a bell-tower so the bell was mounted on a wooden scaffold. To
enter the ancient edifice is to enter directly into the past.

  [Illustration: _Detail of Cloister, San Miguel_]

  [Illustration: _Forecourt, San Miguel_]

  [Illustration: _Chapel_]

  [Illustration: _Gate to Forecourt_]

  [Illustration: _Entrance to Cloister_]

  [Illustration: _Ruins of Arches, San Antonio De Padua_]

  [Illustration: _Double Arched Window_]

A few rain-washed adobe walls around which the wind blows constantly is
all that is left of Mission Nuestra Señora Dolorissima de la Soledad. A
picture of dreary desolation and aptly named, Our Lady of Solitude.

  [Illustration: _Side View_]

  [Illustration: _Arches_]

  [Illustration: _Façade, San Antonio De Padua_]

  [Illustration: _Doorway to Sacristy, San Antonio De Padua_]

Father Serra founded his third Mission, San Antonio de Padua, in a well
wooded valley. When the bells rang in celebration an Indian appeared out
of the trees, and for the first time a native was present at the
founding of a mission. Its quiet surroundings are very much as they were
in the past. The buildings were constructed of brick instead of adobe.
Parts of a stone-walled irrigation ditch which brought water for many
miles still stand near at hand.

Monterey was used as a mission for but one year and then became the
Presidio Chapel. Behind the Mission is the tree under which the first
Mass in California was offered. Many of the old relics of the early
Church are preserved here. It is now the San Carlos Parish Church.

  [Illustration: _Soledad_]

  [Illustration: _Tower at San Juan Bautista_]

When Father Serra decided to move the Mission from Monterey he chose a
site about five miles away where the Rio Carmelo enters the sea. Here he
founded Mission San Carlos Borromeo, which became the headquarters of
the _Padre Presidentes_ of the California missions. In its quiet
sanctuary are the graves of Father Serra, Lasuén, Crespi and López,
names famous in the history of the missions. Father Serra spent most of
his life at San Carlos. His cell, measuring about eleven feet square,
has been restored. The building is Moorish in style.

  [Illustration: _San Juan Bautista_]

A replica in concrete has been built of Mission Santa Cruz. It is about
half the size of the original and stands on the old Mission grounds.

Mission San Juan Bautista stands facing the plaza in the old pueblo of
San Juan. It was here that Helen Hunt Jackson began her famous story,
“Ramona” and Joaquin Murrietta, the famous Mexican bandit, worshipped.
San Juan saw great activity during the gold rush as it was a stage stop
on the road to the mines. The long arcade that extends the whole length
of the building, contains twenty arches. In the garden is a sundial,
placed there by the padres. Its old cemetery is in an olive grove whose
trees cast fantastic shadows on the time worn headstones.

  [Illustration: _Cloister_]

  [Illustration: _Window_]

  [Illustration: _Doorway at San Juan Bautista_]

  [Illustration: _End of Cloister_]

  [Illustration: _Garden, San Juan Bautista_]

  [Illustration: _Cemetery at San Juan Bautista_]

  [Illustration: _Arches_]

On the site of Mission Santa Clara de Asís stands a concrete structure,
the chapel of the University of Santa Clara. All that remains of the old
buildings are a few tiles in the roof, and a part of the garden wall. In
front of the Church stands the old redwood cross, raised in 1777. It is
now encased in a sheathing of pine.

  [Illustration: _Parish Church, Monterey_]

Mission San José de Guadalupe was at one time the most prosperous of all
the missions. In livestock alone it had 12,000 cattle, 13,000 horses and
13,000 sheep. It was the centre of social life for the surrounding
ranches and the stopping place for the Forty-niners who used the Mission
Pass between San Francisco and the mines. Only a part of the living
quarters remains today. Beside this building is the old cemetery, back
of which is the Mission garden.

  [Illustration: _Doorway, Monterey_]

  [Illustration: _San Carlos De Borromeo_]

  [Illustration: _Doorway, San Carlos De Borromeo_]

  [Illustration: _Fountain Detail_]

  [Illustration: _Gateway to Cemetery_]

There was nothing in the original plans of the missions to name one
after St. Francis, the founder of the Franciscan Order. The Mexican
Visitador said, “If Saint Francis wishes a mission, let him show you a
good port, and let it bear his name.” When Portolá discovered San
Francisco Bay he decided that it was the place the Visitador meant, but
it was not until seven years later that the Mission San Francisco de
Asís was founded. It was commonly called Dolores after a small river
that flowed through the Mission grounds. It is quite different in its
architecture from the other missions. It has neither archway nor towers
but a massive façade. Today it stands in quiet simplicity, surrounded on
all sides by modern buildings of the Catholic Church.

  [Illustration: _Bell Tower, San Carlos De Borromeo_]

  [Illustration: _Santa Cruz_]

In the city of San Rafael stands a mission bell guidepost, marking the
site of Mission San Rafael Arcángel.

  [Illustration: _Santa Clara_]

  [Illustration: _San José De Guadalupe_]

  [Illustration: _Porch_]

  [Illustration: _San Francisco De Asís_]

  [Illustration: _Entrance to Cloister_]

Fear of the Russians caused the Governor to ask Father Altimira to
establish a mission at Sonoma. He did this without the sanction of the
Church authorities. Mission San Francisco Solano was the last and the
most northerly of the twenty-one missions. It is a plain low building,
facing the plaza.

Of the twenty-one missions originally built one is completely gone,
another a crumbling wall of adobe, and the remainder in only partial
restoration. May they all some day be restored to their original
grandeur, and the romance and history of Old California again be found
in their splendid old walls.

  [Illustration: _Entrance to Chapel_]

  [Illustration: _Cloister, San Francisco De Solano_]




          LOCATION OF MISSIONS IN THE ORDER OF THEIR FOUNDING


  Name                   Date             Location

  San Diego de Alcalá    _July 16, 1769_  In Mission Valley six miles
                                          N.W. of San Diego.
  San Carlos Borromeo    _June 3, 1770_   On the outskirts of village
                                          of Carmel which is five
                                          miles from Monterey.
  San Antonio de Padua   _July 14, 1771_  Six miles from Jolon. Jolon
                                          is twenty miles from King
                                          City. Can also be reached
                                          from San Simeon Highway
                                          over very mountainous road.
                                          Advise going by way of King
                                          City.
  San Gabriel Arcángel   _Sept. 8, 1771_  In city of San Gabriel
                                          which is 10 miles from Los
                                          Angeles.
  San Luis Obispo de     _Sept. 1, 1772_  In centre of city of San
    Tolosa                                Luis Obispo.
  San Francisco de Asís  _June 29, 1776_  In San Francisco at 16th
    (Mission Dolores)                     and Dolores Streets.
  San Juan Capistrano    _Nov. 1, 1776_   In village of San Juan
                                          Capistrano which is 65
                                          miles south of Los Angeles
                                          on the highway to San Diego.
  Santa Clara de Asis    _Jan. 12, 1777_  In the grounds of the
                                          University of Santa Clara
                                          which is in the city of
                                          Santa Clara.
  San Buenaventura       _March 31, 1782_ Located in city of Ventura
                                          which is 60 miles north of
                                          Los Angeles.
  Santa Barbara          _Dec. 4, 1786_   In the city of Santa
                                          Barbara.
  La Purísima Concepción _Dec. 8, 1787_   Five miles north of town of
                                          Lompoc.
  Santa Cruz             _Aug. 28, 1791_  In city of Santa Cruz.
  Soledad                _Oct. 9, 1791_   Ruins of this Mission are
                                          about two miles from the
                                          town of Soledad.
  San José               _June 11, 1797_  About 15 miles north of San
                                          Jose on the Oakland Highway.
  San Juan Bautista      _June 24, 1797_  In town of San Juan
                                          Bautista.
  San Miguel Arcángel    _July 25, 1797_  Ten miles north of Paso
                                          Robles on U.S. 101.
  San Fernando Rey       _Sept. 8, 1797_  On outskirts of town of San
                                          Fernando.
  San Luis Rey           _June 13, 1798_  Five miles east of town of
                                          Oceanside.
  Santa Inéz             _Sept. 17, 1804_ Three miles east of town of
                                          Buellton.
  San Rafael Arcángel    _Dec. 14, 1817_  Nothing remains of Mission.
                                          Site now marked by
                                          guidepost in city of San
                                          Rafael.
  San Francisco Solano   _July 4, 1823_   In city of Sonoma, thirty
                                          miles north of San
                                          Francisco.
  Pala                   _1816_           Twenty-one miles from
                                          Mission San Luis Rey in the
                                          village of Pala at base of
                                          Palomar Mountain.
  Royal Presidio Chapel  _June 3, 1770_   In city of Monterey.

  [Illustration: Cross]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original—this e-text is public
  domain in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.

--Moved some captions closer to the corresponding pictures.

--In the text versions, delimited italicized text by _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's California Missions, by Karl Frederick Brown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CALIFORNIA MISSIONS ***

***** This file should be named 55931-0.txt or 55931-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/9/3/55931/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of When I Was a Boy in Japan, by Sakae Shioya

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: When I Was a Boy in Japan

Author: Sakae Shioya

Release Date: November 11, 2017 [EBook #55939]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHEN I WAS A BOY IN JAPAN ***




Produced by MFR, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









[Illustration: SHIO YA SAKAE]




  WHEN I WAS A BOY
  IN JAPAN

  BY
  SAKAE SHIOYA

  _ILLUSTRATED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS_

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON
  LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO.




  Published, August, 1906.


  COPYRIGHT, 1906, BY LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO.


  _All Rights Reserved._


  WHEN I WAS A BOY IN JAPAN.


  Norwood Press
  Berwick & Smith Co.
  Norwood, Mass., U. S. A.




PREFACE


Japanese boys have not been introduced very much to their little
American friends, and the purpose of this book is to provide an
introduction by telling some of the experiences which are common to
most Japanese boys of the present time, together with some account of
the customs and manners belonging to their life. I can at least claim
that the story is told as it could be only by one who had actually
lived the life that is portrayed. I have endeavored to hold the
interest of my young readers by bringing in more or less of amusement.
The little girl companion is introduced to widen the interest and add
somewhat more of the story element than would otherwise be present. The
sketches composing the various chapters are necessarily disconnected,
but they form a series of pictures, priceless at least to the author,
which foreign eyes have seldom been allowed to see.

                                                           SAKAE SHIOYA.

    YALE UNIVERSITY, 1905.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I.: MY INFANCY.
    How I Looked--My Name--Walking--In Tea Season--My
    Toys--“Kidnapped”--O-dango                                         9

  CHAPTER II.: AT HOME.
    Introduction--Dinner--Rice--Turning to Cows--A Bamboo
    Dragon-fly--A Watermelon Lantern--On a Rainy Evening--The
    Story of a Badger                                                 23

  CHAPTER III.: THE VILLAGE SCHOOL.
    A Mimic School--Preparations--The School--How Classes Are
    Conducted--Out of Tune--A Moral Story--School
    Discipline--Playthings--“Knife Sense”                             35

  CHAPTER IV.: IN TOKYO.
    Where We Settled--A Police Stand--Stores--“Broadway”--
    Illumination--The Foreign Settlement                              51

  CHAPTER V.: MY NEW SCHOOL.
    Tomo-chan--The Men with Wens--A Curious Punishment--How I
    Experienced It--Kotoro-Kotoro                                     62

  CHAPTER VI.: CHINESE EDUCATION.
    My Chinese Teacher--How I Was Taught--Versification--My
    Uncle--Clam Fishing--A Flatfish                                   76

  CHAPTER VII.: AN EVENING FÊTE.
    My Father--His Love for Potted Trees--A Local Fête--Show
    Booths--Goldfish Booths--Singing Insects--How a Potted Tree
    Was Bought                                                        91

  CHAPTER VIII.: SUMMER DAYS.
    A Swimming School--How I Was Taught to Swim--Diving--The Old
    Home Week--Return of the Departed Souls--Visiting the Ancestral
    Graves--The Memorable Night--A Village Dance                     102

  CHAPTER IX.: THE ENGLISH SCHOOL.
    A Night at the Dormitory--Beginning English--Grammar--
    Pronunciation--School Moved--Mother’s Love                       114

  CHAPTER X.: A BOY ASTRONOMER.
    What I Intended to Be--My Aun View--My Parents’ Approval--My
    Uncle’s Enthusiasm--The Total Eclipse of the Sun                 128

  CHAPTER XI.: IN THE SUBURBS.
    A Novel Experiment--Removal--Our New
    House--Angling--Tomo-chan’s Visit                                143




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                    PAGE

  SAKAE SHIOYA                                   _Portrait Frontispiece_

  A JAPANESE HOUSE                                                    22

  A JAPANESE SCHOOL SCENE                                             40

  THE JAPANESE “BROADWAY”                                             56

  A TYPICAL JAPANESE STREET                                           90

  A JAPANESE SCHOOL OF THE PRESENT DAY                               120




WHEN I WAS A BOY IN JAPAN




CHAPTER I

MY INFANCY

    How I Looked--My Name--Walking--In Tea Season--My
    Toys--“Kidnapped”--O-dango.


I suppose I don’t need to tell you exactly, my little friends, when
and where I was born, because Japanese names are rather hard for you
to remember, and then I don’t want to disclose my age. Suffice it to
say that I was once a baby like all of you and my birthplace was about
a day’s journey from Tokyo, the capital of Japan. I wish I could have
observed myself and noted down every funny thing I did when very small,
as the guardian angel, who is said to be standing by every cradle, will
surely do. But when my memory began to be serviceable, I was well on
in my infancy, and if I were to rely on that only, I should have to
skip over a considerable length of time. How I should dislike to do
this! So, my little friends, let me construct this chapter out of bits
of things my mamma used to tell me now and then.

When I was born, my father was away. Grandma was very proud to have a
boy for the first-born, and at once wrote him a letter saying that a
son was born to him and that he was like--and then she wrote two large
circles, meaning that I was very, very plump. Do you know how a plump
Japanese baby looks? I have often wondered myself, and have many a
time watched a baby taking a bath. Let us suppose him to be one year
old and about to be put into warm water in a wooden tub. His chin is
dimple-cleft, his cheeks ripe as an apple, and his limbs are but a
continuation of his fat trunk. And how jolly the elfin is! After the
queer expression he has shown on being dipped has passed away and he
realizes what he is about, he will make many quick bows--really, I
assure you, to show his thanks for the trouble of washing him. At this,
mother, sister, and the maid assisting them give a burst of laughter,
when, with a scream of immense delight, he will strike his fists into
the water, causing a panic among the well-clad and not-ready-to-get-wet
attendants. With royal indifference, however, he will then try to push
his fist into his mouth, and not grumbling at all over his ill-success,
he will set about telling a story with his everlasting mum-mum. Now he
is taken out and laid on a towel. Glowing red, how he will move his
arms and legs like an overturned turtle! Well, that is how I looked, I
am very sure.

In Japan, in christening a child, we follow the principle of “A good
name is better than rich ointment.” I was named Sakae, which in the
hierographic Chinese characters represents fire burning on a stand. The
idea of illumination will perhaps suggest itself to you at once, and
indeed, it means glory or thrift. And my well-wishing parents named me
so, that I might thrive and be a glory to my family. So I was bound to
be good, wasn’t I? A bad boy with a good name would be very much like a
monkey with a silk hat on.

Now begins my walking. Now and then mamma or grandma would train me,
taking my hands and singing:

  “Anyo wa o-jozu,
  Korobu wa o-heta.”

But my secret delight--so I judge--was to stand by myself, clinging to
the convenient checkered frames of paper screens, which covered the
whole length of the veranda. When I went from one side to the other, at
first without being noticed--of course walking like a crab--and then
suddenly being discovered with a shout of admiration, I used to come
down with a bump, which, however, never hurt me--I was so plump, you
know. I must describe here a sort of ceremony, or rather an ordeal, I
had to pass through when I was fairly able to stand and walk without
any help. For this I must begin with my house.

My house stood on the outskirts of the town, where the land rose to a
low hill and was covered with tea-plants. We owned a part of it hedged
in by criptomerias.

We were not regular tea dealers, but we used to have an exciting
time in the season preparing our crop. Lots of red-cheeked country
girls would come to pick the leaves, and it was a sight to see them
working. With their heads nicely wrapped with pieces of white and
blue cloth, jetting out of the green ocean of tea-leaves, they would
sing peculiarly effective country songs, mostly in solos with a short
refrain in chorus. But they were not having a concert, and if you
should step in among them, they would make a hero of you, those girls.
And then we had also a good many young men working at tea-heaters.

Here they likewise sang snatches of songs, but their principal business
was to roll up steamed leaves and dry them over the fire. But when
work is combined with fun, it is a great temptation for a boy, and I,
a lad of five or six, I remember, would have a share among them, and,
standing on a high stool by a heater and baring my right shoulder like
the rest, would join more in a refrain than in rolling the leaves.

But I was going to tell you about the ceremony I had to pass through,
wasn’t I? Well, it happened, or rather somebody especially arranged it
so, I suspect, that I should have it just at the time of this great
excitement. The ceremony itself is like this. They take a child fairly
able to walk, load him with some heavy thing, and place him in a sort
of a large basket shaped like the blade of a shovel. Now let him walk.
The basket will rock under him, the load is too heavy for him, and he
will fall down.

If he does, it is taken for granted that he has in that one act had all
the falls that he would otherwise meet in his later life. So, if he
appears too strong to stumble, he will be shaken down by some roguish
hands before he gets out of it.

I was to go through this before august spectators--country girls.
They liked to see me plump, because some of them were even more plump
than I. At any rate, from everywhere they saluted me as “Bot’chan,”
“Bot’chan.” If I had returned every salute by looking this way and
that, I should have broken my neck. But it was customary to make a bow
anyway, and I was ordered by my mamma to do so. On this occasion I
made two snap bows with my chin, which excited laughter. Now a basket
was produced, a brand-new one, I remember, and I was loaded with some
heavy rice cake. I stood up, however, like Master Peachling of our
fairy-tale, who is said to have surprised his adopted mother by rising
in his bathtub on the very day of his birth! I was then placed in the
basket and made to walk.

I looked intently at the basket, not because it was new, but because it
gave me a queer motion, the ups and downs of a boat, a new sensation
to me, anyway. Attracted, however, by the merry voices of the crowd,
I looked at them, and suddenly, being pleased with so many smiling
faces, raised a cry of delight, when down I came with a loud noise. A
roar of laughter broke out with the clapping of hands. The noise buried
my surprise and I also clapped my hands without knowing who was being
cheered.

As the first-born of the house, I must have had lots of playthings. But
there were two things I remember as clear as the day. One was a sword,
all wood, however. As the son of a samurai, I should have had to serve
my lord under the old régime and stake my life and honor on the two
blades of steel. And so even if the good old days were gone, something
to remind us of them was kept and made a plaything of. But really, I
liked my wooden sword. The other thing was a horse--a hobby-horse, I
mean. I don’t know just how many horses I had, but I wanted any number
of them. I had some pictures, but they were all of horses. If not, I
would not accept the presents. And with these two kinds of treasures I
enjoyed most of my childhood days, the sword slantingly on my side, and
the horse, which I fancied trotting, under me, while I shouted “Haiyo!
haiyo!”

Although I had my own name, people called me “Bot’chan,” as I have
said, because it is a general term of endearment, and papa and mamma
would call me “Bô” or “Bôya.” Among those who addressed me thus, I
remember very well one middle-aged woman who often came to steal me
from mamma, and by whom I was only too glad to be stolen.

We had a long veranda facing the garden, on which I passed most of
my days. There I rode on my hobby-horse or played with my little dog
Shiro, who would go through all sorts of tricks for a morsel of nice
things. Suddenly my laugh would cease and nothing of me would be heard.
Wondering what the matter was, mamma would open the paper screen
to see, and lo! not a shadow of me was to be seen. Even Shiro had
disappeared. Attacked with a feeling something akin to horror, she used
to picture--so I imagine--a winged tengu (a Japanese harpy) swooping
down and carrying me away to some distant hill. But soon finding
recent steps of clogs on the ground, coming to and receding from the
veranda, she would nod and smile at the trick. She knew that I had been
kidnapped by a good soul!

Now I want to give you some reasons why I liked this woman. First of
all, it was because she always carried me on her back. The only way to
appreciate what it is to be tall, would be to be a grown-up man and
a small child at the same time. And that is exactly the feeling that
I had. I could see lots of curious things over the forbidden hedges.
I could even see things over the house-tops; they were all one-story,
and built low, though. In a word, I always felt while on her back like
a wee pig who had first toddled out into a wide, wide world. And then
she would carry me through town. What life there was! After crossing
a bridge which spanned the stream, coming from the beautiful lake on
the north and going a little way along a row of pine-trees, we would
come on a flock of ducks and geese on their way to the water. What a
noise they made,--quack, quack! Then we would begin inspecting rows
of houses, open to the street and in which all sorts of things were
sold. Men, women, and children, as well as dogs, seemed to be very much
occupied. Then I would spy some horses laden with straw bags and wood.
Real horses they were, but I was rather disappointed to find them so
big and their appearance not half so good as in my pictures. My faith
in them always began to shake a little bit, but still I used to persist
in thinking that my hobby-horses and pictures were nearer the reality
than those we met on the street. And wasn’t it curious that my belief
was at last substantiated by seeing a Shetland pony in America after
some twenty years? Ah, that was exactly what I had in mind!

Then I would hear a merry prattle on a drum--_terent-tenten,
terent-tenten_. Ah, here would come boy acrobats dressed in something
like girls’ gymnasium suits, with a small mask of a lion’s head with a
plume on it, on their heads. A funny sort of boy, I thought, but on my
woman’s giving them some pennies, they would perform all sorts of feats
which interested me never so much. The woman used to shake me to make
sure that I was not dead, as I kept very quiet, watching.

The woman’s house was just behind the street, and she was sure to
take me there. Here was another reason why I liked her very much.
She seemed to know just what I wanted. She would set me on the sunny
veranda and bring me some nice o-dango (rice dumpling). This she made
herself, and it was prepared just to my liking, covered well with soy
and baked deliciously. I was in clover if I only had that!

I will describe one of my visits, which will well represent them all.
The day was calm and bright, and while we were feasting--she had some
of the good things, too--her pussy sat on one end of the veranda and
was finishing her toilet in the sun. Even the sparrows in this peaceful
weather forgot that they were birds of air, and fell from the trees and
were wrestling noisily on the ground. Only the pussy’s move broke up
their sport. By this time we were very near the end of our business.
Turning from the sparrows, my woman glanced at me and sat for a moment
transfixed with the awful sight I presented. There I was with my
cheeks and nose all besmeared with brown soy, stretching my sticky
hands in a helpless attitude, and licking my mouth by way of variation.
She now broke into laughter and was scrambling on the floor, weak with
merriment. But my mute appeal was too eloquent; indeed, I was all ready
to shed tears with an utter sense of helplessness when she hastened to
bring a wet towel and wipe my face and hands clean and nice, with,
“Oh, my poor Bot’chan!”

[Illustration: A JAPANESE HOUSE.]




CHAPTER II

AT HOME

    Introduction--Dinner--Rice--Turning to Cows--A Bamboo Dragon-fly--A
    Watermelon Lantern--On a Rainy Evening--The Story of a Badger.


Our family consisted of father, mother, grandmother, and two children
besides myself, at the time when I was six years old. I don’t remember
exactly what business my father was in, but my impression is that he
had no particular one. He had been trained for the old samurai and
devoted most of his youthful days to fencing, riding, and archery.
But by the time he had come of age, that training was of no use to
him professionally, because, as quickly as you can turn the palm of
your hand, Japan went through a wonderful change from the old feudal
régime to the era of new civilization. So my father, and many, many
others like him, were just in mid-air, so to speak, being thrown out of
their proper sphere, but unable to settle as yet to the solid ground
and adapt themselves to new ways. My mother came also of the samurai
stock, and, like most of her class, kept in her cabinet a small sword
beautifully ornamented in gold work, with which she was ready to defend
her honor whenever obliged to. But far from being mannish, she was
as meek as a lamb, and was devoted to my father and her children. My
grandmother was of a retiring nature and I cannot draw her very much
into my narrative. But she was very good to everybody, and her daily
work, so far as I can remember, was to take a walk around the farm
every morning. She was so regular in this habit that I cannot think
of her without associating her with the scent of the dewy morning and
with the green of the field which stretched before her. She died not
many years after, but I often wonder if she is really dead. To me
she is still living, and what the great poet said of Lucy Gray sounds
peculiarly true in her case, too.

  “--Yet some maintain that to this day
    She is a living child;
  That you may see sweet Lucy Gray
    Upon the lonesome wild.

  “O’er rough and smooth she trips along,
    And never looks behind;
  And sings a solitary song
    That whistles in the wind.”

Only you would have to make Lucy seventy years old to fit my
grandmother.

The introduction being over, let us attend a dinner, or rather
give attention to a description of one. We do not eat at one large
dining-table with chairs around it. We each have a separate small table
about a foot and a half square, all lacquered red, green, or black, and
sit before it on our heels. A rice bucket, a teapot, some saucers, a
bottle of soy, and so forth, are all placed near some one who is to
specially serve us. We used to sit in two rows, father and grandmother
facing each other, mother next to father, with the young sister
opposite my brother and myself. The younger children usually sit next
to some older person who can help them in eating. No grace was said,
but I always bowed to my elders before I began with “itadakimasu” (I
take this with thanks), which I sometimes said when I was very hungry,
as a good excuse and signal to start eating before the others.

Rice is our staple food and an almost reverential attitude toward it
as the sustainer of our life is entertained by the people. And I was
told time and again not to waste it. Once a maid, so my mother used to
tell me, was very careless in cleaning rice before it was cooked. She
dropped lots of grains on the stone floor under the sink day after day,
and never stopped to pick them up. One day, when she wanted to clean
the floor, she was frightened half to death by finding there ever so
many white serpents straining their necks at her. She really fainted
when the goddess of the kitchen appeared to her in her trance and bade
her to take all those white serpents in a basket and wash them clean.
As she came to herself, she did as she was told, trembling with horror
at touching such vile things, some of which, indeed, would try to coil
themselves around her hands. But as the last pailful of water was
poured on them, lo! what were serpents a moment ago were now all turned
into nice grains of rice ready to be boiled. Now if there is one thing
in the world I hate, it is a serpent; the mere mention of it makes my
flesh creep. So you see I took care to pitch every grain of boiled rice
into my mouth with my chop-sticks before I left my table.

Another story was told me concerning the meal. The Japanese teach home
discipline by stories, you know. This was a short one, being merely
the statement that if anybody lies down on the floor soon after he
has eaten his meal, he will turn into a cow. Now a number of times I
had found cows chewing their cuds while stretched upon the ground. So
I thought, in my childish mind, that there must be some mysterious
connection between each of the three in the order as they stand:
eating--lying down--cow. So, naturally, I avoided the second process,
and, after eating, immediately ran out-of-doors to see what our man,
Kichi, was doing.

Kichi worked on our little farm, and I usually found him cleaning his
implements after the day’s work. We were great friends, and he used
to present me with toys of his own making, which were very simple but
indeed a marvel to me. Once he picked up a piece of bamboo and made a
chip of it about a twelfth of an inch thick, a third of an inch wide,
and three inches and a half long. Then he sliced obliquely one-half
of one side and the other half of the same side in the opposite
direction, so that the edges might be made thin. He also bored a small
hole in the middle and put in a stick about twice as thick as a hairpin
and about four inches long, the sliced side being down. He then cut off
the projecting end of the stick, when it was tight in the chip. The
dragon-fly was now ready to take flight. He took the stick between his
palms and gave a twist, when lo! it flew away up in the air.

I was delighted with the toy, and tried several times to make it fly.
But when I used all my force and gave it a good long twist, why, it
took such a successful flight that it hit the edge of the comb of our
straw roof and stuck there, never to come down. I was very sorry at
that, but Kichi laughed at the feat the dragon-fly had performed, and
said that the maker was so skilful that the toy turned out to be a real
living thing! It was perched there for the night. Well, I admired his
skill very much, but did not want to lose my toy in that way. So I
made him promise me to make another the next day, reminding him not to
put too much skill in it.

It was summer, the season of watermelons. We had a small melon patch
and an ample supply of the fruit. Here was a chance for Kichi to try
his skill again. One evening he took a pretty round melon and scooped
the inside out so as to put in a lighted candle. So far this was
very ordinary. He scraped the inner part until the rind was fairly
transparent, and then cut a mouth, a nose, and eyes with eyebrows
sticking out like pins. He then painted them so that when the candle
was lighted a monster of a melon was produced. How triumphant a boy
would feel in possessing such a thing! I hung it on the veranda that
evening when the room was weirdly lighted by one or two greenish paper
lanterns, and watched it with my folks. I expressed my admiration for
Kichi’s skill, and with boyish fondness for exaggeration mentioned
the fact that a toy dragon-fly of his making had really turned out
to be a living thing. All laughed, but of course I made an effort to
be serious. But no sooner were we silent than, without the slightest
hint, the melon angrily dropped down with a crash. I screamed, but,
being assured of its safety, I approached it and found the skull of
the monster was badly fractured, in fact, one piece of it flying some
twenty feet out in the garden. The next morning I took the first
opportunity to tell Kichi that his toy was so skilfully made that it
sought death of its own accord.

Well, I started to tell what I did evenings, but when it was wet I
had a very tedious time. Nothing is more dismal to a boy than a rainy
day. To lie down was to become a cow. So one rainy evening I opened
the screen, and, standing, looked out at the rain. But this was no
fun. The only alternative was to go to one of the rooms. Now there
is no chair in a Japanese house, and to sit over one’s heels is too
ceremonial, not to say a bit trying, even for a Japanese child. So
my legs unconsciously collapsed, and there I was lying on my back,
singing aloud some songs I had learned. Presently I began to look at
the unpainted ceiling, and traced the grain. And is it not wonderful
that out of knots and veins of wood you can make figures of some living
things? Yes, I traced a man’s face, one eye much larger than the other.
Then, I had a cat. Now I began to trace a big one with a V-shaped face.
A cow! The idea ran through me with the swiftness of lightning, and
the next moment I sprang to my feet and shook myself to see if I had
undergone any transformation. Luckily, I was all right. But to make the
thing sure, I felt of my forehead carefully to see if anything hard was
coming out of it.

The room now lost its attraction. And I ran away to the room where my
grandmother was. Opening the screen, I said:

“Grandma!”

“Well, Bô?”

“May I come in? I want you to tell me the story of a badger, grandma.”

I was never tired of hearing the same stories over and over again from
my grandmother. There was at some distance a tall tree, shooting up
like an arrow to the sky, which was visible from a window of her room.
It was there that the badger of her story liked to climb. One early
evening he was there with the cover of an iron pot, which he made with
his magic power appear like a misty moon. Now a farmer, who was still
working in the field, chanced to see it, and was surprised to find
that it was already so late. He could tell the hour from the position
of the moon, you know. So he made haste to finish his work, and was
going home, when another moon, the real one this time, peeped out of
the wood near by. The badger, however, had too much faith in his art
to withdraw his mock moon, and held it there to rival the newly risen
one. The farmer was astonished to find two moons at the same time, but
he was not slow to see which was real. He smiled at the trick of the
badger, and now wanted to outwit him. He approached the tree stealthily
and shook it with all his might. The badger was not prepared for this.
Losing his balance, he dropped down to the ground, moon and all, and
had to run for his life, for the farmer was right after him with his
hoe.

I laughed and grandma laughed, too, over her own story, when the paper
screen was suddenly brightened.

“The badger’s moon!” I cried, and climbed up to my grandmother.

“Yes, I am a badger,” said a voice, as the door was opened. And there
stood my mother with a paper lantern she had brought for the room.




CHAPTER III

THE VILLAGE SCHOOL

    A Mimic School--Preparations--The School--How Classes
    Are Conducted--Out of Tune--A Moral Story--School
    Discipline--Playthings--“Knife Sense.”


At the age of six I was sent to school. For some time before the
fall opening, I was filled with excitement and curiosity and looked
forward to the day with great impatience. As our neighbors were few and
scattered and I did not have many playmates, I wondered how I should
feel on coming in contact with so many boys, most of whom were older
than I. And then there was study. I had a faint idea what a learned
scholar such as Confucius was, and felt as if a plunge into school a
day or two would half convert me into that obscure ideal. Weeks before,
I insisted on having a mimic school at home to prepare myself a little
for the august event, and with my mother as teacher I learned the
numerals and the forty-eight letters of the Japanese alphabet by heart.
I wished to do just as I would at school, and so I used to go outdoors
and with measured steps approach the porch. Entering the house, I sat
down before a table and bowed reverentially. When my mother was there
before me, I cheerfully began to study, well, for five minutes or so,
but when I found her not quite ready I was mercilessly thrown out of
humor, and only her exaggerated bows for apology would induce me to dry
my sorrowful tears.

The few days before the opening of the school were taken for my
preparation. I needed copy-books, a slate, an abacus, which is a frame
strung with wires on which are wooden beads to be moved in counting
and reckoning, and a small writing-box, containing a stone ink-well,
a cake of India ink, a china water-vessel, and brushes. I must have
also a round lunch set, the three pieces of which can be piled one
upon another like a miniature pagoda, and then, when empty, be put one
within another to reduce the size. A pair of chop-sticks went with
the set of course. Now all must be purchased new as if everything had
a new start. And then a new school suit was procured together with a
navy cap. These were all ready a day before, and were exhibited on the
alcove.

My younger brother was possessed of the school mania at the sight of
these last, and insisted that he would have his set, too. And so mimic
ones were procured, and these formed a second row together with his
holiday suit.

And then came the night before I was to go. I played the part of a
watch-dog by sleeping right near my property. In fact, I went to bed
early, but I could not sleep till after everybody had retired for
the night. And then I dreamed that my abacus stood up, its beads
chattering on how to start the trip in the morning. It was joined by
the copy-book, made of soft, Japanese paper, which parted hither and
thither in walking, as a lady’s skirt,--a Japanese lady’s, I mean. The
chairman was my navy cap. I did not know how they decided, but they
must have come to a peaceful agreement, as they were found, when I
awoke in the morning, exactly in the same place, lying quiet.

The next morning I set out with my father for the school. The faces of
every one in the house were at the door looking at me. I made every
effort to be dignified in walking, but could not help looking back just
once, when my face relaxed into a smile, and I felt suddenly very shy.
But as I heard my younger brother struggling to get away from my mother
to follow me, I hastened my steps to turn round a corner of the road.

The school was a low, dark-looking building, with paper-screened
windows all around like a broad white belt, and with a spacious porch
with dusty shelves to leave clogs on. When we arrived, we were led into
a side room, where we met the master or principal, and soon my father
returned home, leaving me to his care. I felt somewhat lonesome with
strangers all around, but kept myself as cool as possible, which effort
was very much like stopping a leak with the hands. A slight neglect
would bring something misty into my eyes. But now all the boys--and
girls, too, in the other room--came into one large room. Some forty of
the older ones and fifteen of those who had newly entered took their
seats, the older ones glancing curiously at the newcomers. But we were
all in back seats and so were not annoyed with looks that would have
been felt piercing us from behind. The desk I was assigned to was a
miserable one; not only was it besmeared with ink ages old, but cuts
were made here and there as if it were a well-fought battleground. But
I did not feel ashamed to sit there, as I thought that this was a kind
of place in which a Confucius was to be brought up.

Looking awhile on what was going on, I found the boys were divided into
three classes. The method of teaching was curious; one class alone
was allowed to have a reading lesson, while the other two were having
writing or arithmetic, that is, the teaching was so arranged that what
one class was doing might not disturb the others. I was struck, even in
my boyish mind, with the happy method, and learned the first lesson in
management. And then reading was done partly in unison with the master,
in a singsong style, and the effect was pleasing, if it was not very
loud. The class in arithmetic, on the other hand, sent out a pattering
noise of pencils on the slates, which in a confused mass would form
an overtone of the orchestra. A writing lesson taken in the midst of
such a company was never tiresome. Indeed, anything out of tune would
send the whole house into laughter, and such things were constantly
happening.

[Illustration: A JAPANESE SCHOOL SCENE.]

I was not slow in becoming acquainted with the boys. As I went into the
playground for the first time, I felt rather awkward to find nobody to
play with. But soon two boys whom I knew thrust themselves before me
and uncovered their heads. And from that moment the playground became
a place of great interest to me. Two friends grew into five, eight,
ten, and fifteen, and in three days I felt as if I possessed the whole
ground.

As things grew more familiar, I found almost every boy was striving
a little bit to be out of tune. When singsong reading was going on,
pupils echoing responsively the teacher’s voice, some wild boy would
suddenly redouble his effort with gusto, and his voice, like that of a
strangled chicken, would soar away up, to the great merriment of the
rest. And then often a boy, whose mind was occupied with a hundred
and one things except the book, engaged in some sly communication
with another, unconscious of the teacher’s approach, when he would
literally jump into the air as the master’s whip descended sharply
on his desk. We sat by twos on benches, and when one boy saw his
companion carelessly perching on the end of the bench, just right for
experimenting the principle of the lever, he would not miss a moment
to stand up, presumably to ask some question. But no sooner had he
called to the teacher, than the other fellow would shoot down to the
floor with a cry, and the bench come back with a tremendous noise. But
this was not all. When the boys could not find a pretense to make a
noise, they would stealthily paint their faces with writing brushes.
Two touches would be enough to grow a thick mustache curling up to
the ears. When the teacher faced a dozen of those mustache-wearing
boys who were unable to efface their naughty acts as quickly as they
had committed them, he could do nothing but to burst into undignified
laughter.

One day a strange method of discipline was instituted. The teacher
must have been at a loss to bring the urchins to behave well. It was
the last hour, the only hour, I think, the boys kept quiet. They did
so partly because the course bore the great name of ethics, but more
because moral stories were told. And the boys did not care whether the
stories were moral or not, as long as they were interesting. Here is
one of the twenty-four Chinese stories that teach filial duty:

There was once a boy by the name of Ching who had an old mother. He was
a good boy, and did what he could to please her. The mother, however,
often asked for things hard to get. One day in winter she wanted some
carp for her dinner. It was very cold, and the lake where Ching used to
fish was all frozen. What could he do? He, however, went to the lake,
looked about the place to find out where the ice was not thick, and,
baring himself about his stomach, lay flat to thaw it. It was a very
difficult thing to do, but at last the ice gave way, and to his great
joy, from the crevice thus made, a big carp jumped out into the air. So
he could satisfy his mother’s want.

Not only the boys who listened intently, but also the teacher, got
interested as the story grew to the climax, and the latter would
gesticulate and eventually impersonate the dutiful boy, showing
surprise at seeing a carp jumping ten feet into the air. This called
forth laughter which was meant for applause. But the teacher soon came
to himself and called silence. One day, after telling this story, he
said that it was yet half an hour before the time to close, but he
would dismiss us. “But,” he continued, “you can go only one by one,
beginning with those who are quiet and good. This is to train you for
your orderly conduct in study-hours, and if any one cannot keep quiet,
even for half an hour, he shall stay in his place till he can do so.”
This was a severe test. An early dismissal, even of five minutes before
the time, had a special charm for boys, but to-day we could march out
half an hour earlier. And then what a lovely day it was in autumn! The
warm sun was bright, and the trees were ablaze with golden leaves.
Persimmons were waiting for us to climb up and feast on them. After
a moment the boys were as still as night. One by one a “good” boy
was called to leave; they went like lambs to the door, but no sooner
were they out, than some stamped on the stairs noisily and shouted
and laughed on the green, which act showed that the teacher did not
always pick the right ones. I naturally waited my turn with impatience.
I thought I was a pretty good boy. At least I had Confucius for my
ideal, and those who had it were not many. I never did mischief, except
once, and that was really an accident. I dropped my lunch-box in my
arithmetic class, and chased it, as it had rolled off quite a distance.
Half the school laughed at me, and that was all. I was now musing on my
ill-luck when a call came to me at last. It was still a quarter of an
hour before closing time, and I thought the teacher knew me, after all.

Within a month after I entered the school, I made a new discovery as
to a schoolboy’s equipments. I had thought that they consisted only
of books, copy-books, an abacus, and such things. But these form only
a half of them. The other half are hidden to view: they are in the
pockets, or in the sleeves, I should have said. During the recess a
strong cord will come out and also a top about two and a half inches in
diameter, and with an iron ring a quarter of an inch thick. A Japanese
top is a mad thing. When it sings out of the hands and hits that of
the opponent, sending it off crippled, it makes you feel very happy.
Another thing is a sling. It is as old as the time of David, but it
was perfectly new to me. When a pebble shoots out and vanishes in the
air, you feel as though you were able to hit a kite circling away up in
the sky. And another thing! It is a knife, the broad-bladed one. With
it they cut a piece one and a half feet long out of a thick branch of
a tree and sharpen one end of it. Selecting a piece of soft ground,
the boys in turn drive in their own pieces and try to knock over the
others. The game depends much on one’s strength and the kind of wood
one selects. But there is a pleasure in possessing a cruel branch that
will knock off three or four pieces at a blow. Oh, for a knife and a
top! I thought. I disclosed the matter to my mother, who thought a
top was all right and bought me one. But as for the knife, she gave
me a small one, fit only to sharpen a pencil with. I felt ashamed (I
blush to confess, though) even to show it to my schoolmates. If I had
had money, I would have given my all just for a knife. But money was
a mean thing; the possession of it was the root of all evil--so it
was thought, and, indeed, I was penniless. But I must have a decent
knife--decent among boys. If I could only get one I would give my
Confucius for it.

One day I saw my Kichi--we had kept up our meeting ever since. I talked
to him about a knife. He did not tell me how I could get one because
I talked only about what the possession of a good knife would mean to
a boy. It was a rather general remark, but I disliked to go right to
the point. It would be too much to presume on his kindness, you know.
And then I rather wanted him to offer. He, however, produced his own
favorite knife and cut a thick piece of deal right away to show how
sharp it was. Well, I thought he had a knife sense, anyway. So I kept
talking about it day after day, and each time I talked of it he showed
me his, and tried it on a piece of wood.

One day there was a town festival and in the evening I was allowed to
go with Kichi to see it. Kichi’s manner that night was very strange;
he appeared as if he had a chestful of gold. He asked me in a fatherly
manner what I liked, and said he could buy me all the booths if I
wished him to. I never felt so happy as then. I thought my patience had
conquered him at last. And to make a long story short, I came to own a
splendid knife, better than any other boy’s at the school! That night I
slept with it under the pillow.

The next morning the first thing I did was to go to thank Kichi.

“Hello, Kichi,” I shouted. “Thank you very much for the knife.”

“Oh, good morning, Bot’chan. Let me see your knife,” he said. “But I am
sorry that I played a joke on you last night. It was your mother who
paid for it. You must go and thank her for it.”

“Well, never!” I gasped. But being told how she handed him the money
when we started, I gave him a slap--a mild one, though--on his face
and ran immediately to my mother, thinking that after all she had
something more than a mere knife sense.




CHAPTER IV

IN TOKYO

    Where We Settled--A Police
    Stand--Stores--“Broadway”--Illumination--The Foreign Settlement.


About two years after I entered the village school I had to leave it
for good and all. My father, as I have said, was in mid-air between the
heaven of old Japan and the prosaic earth of the new institution. He
would fain have remained there, had he had a pillar of gold to support
him. And it is wonderful to see how this glittering pillar does support
one in almost any place. It was a very serious matter for him to launch
in the new current without any helpful equipment. But he had to do it,
and made up his mind to try his fortune at the very centre of the new
civilization, Tokyo. And so one day we said good-by to our friends
who came to see us off, and started for the capital. “Parting is such
sweet sorrow,” as the poet sang, but I hardly remember now whether I
shed tears or not. As I, however, look back to the day, I cannot but be
grateful for the new move, for the immeasurable benefit it brought at
least to us children.

In Tokyo we settled very near where my aunt lived. The street was
by no means in a noisy quarter, but I can hardly think of anywhere
in the city which was so well situated for being in contact with so
many places of interest, at least for a boy just from the country. It
was near to the “Broadway” of Tokyo, and just as near to the foreign
settlement and to the railroad station, the only one of the kind in the
city in those days. And if I wanted a touch of the old order of things,
there was a big temple, a block on the east, which made its presence
known to the forgetful people by striking a big bell every evening. I
cannot say they rang the bell, because the bells at Buddhist temples
do not chime, but boom. They are so big--bigger than a siege-gun. I
liked the sound very much, as it brought to me like a dream the vision
of a hillside sleeping under the setting sun. But I must not forget to
mention a large piece of grassy ground very near us, where we could
romp, fly kites, or play at a tug-of-war.

Now the first thing I did when I came to the new place was to
familiarize myself with the neighborhood for the sake of running
errands, or just to keep myself informed. First I started eastward and
turned the corner to the left, where I found a wee bit of a house, or
rather a box, six feet by nine, where two policemen were stationed. It
was the first time I had ever seen any of them, and I thought they were
a queer sort of people, who looked at me suspiciously whenever I looked
at them in that way. But I thought as long as I did not do anything
wrong, they would have no reason for coming at me. I also had great
faith that if a thief should break into our house, they would soon come
to our help. So I made several trials to see how quickly I could cover
the distance to give them notice. They must have thought me a strange
boy as I came panting to the police stand and stopped short to look at
the clock inside.

A little beyond began the market. First a grocery store, then a fish
stall, a bean-cake shop, and so on. I remember that the house I most
frequented was a sweet potato store. I could get five or six nice hot
baked pieces for a penny. And how I liked them! At regular intervals
fresh ones were ready and we waited for them, falling into a line.
When we got as much as we wanted, we would run a race lest they
should get too cold. At the end of the street, just opposite a tall
fire-ladder, standing erect and with a bell on the top, was a big meat
store. Beef, pork, everything, they had, and sometimes I found a bill
posted saying, “Mountain Whale, To-day.” Whatever that might be, I
never cared to eat such doubtful things. You never tried sea-horse or
sea-elephant, did you?

Then, going in another direction from my house, I made my way to
“Broadway.” I first crossed a bridge which spanned a canal and came
to an object of much interest. It was a telegraph-pole. I was never
able to count the wires on it unless I did it by the help of a
multiplication table, as there were so many of them, coming from all
parts of the country to the central station. A strange thing about
them was that they sang. When I put my ear to the pole, even on a
windless day, I could hear a number of soft voices wailing, as it were.
I thought they must come from messages running on the wires, many of
which were indeed too sad to describe. And then there was something
which made me think that boys in that vicinity had a very hard
time. Many a time I saw kites with warriors’ faces painted on them,
entangled in the wires. The faces which looked heroic, now seemed only
grinning furiously for agony! But I must not be musing on such things,
for if I did not take care in that crowded thoroughfare, a jinrikisha
man would come dashing from behind with “Heigh, there!” which took the
breath out of a country boy.

[Illustration: THE JAPANESE “BROADWAY.”]

Broadway was built after a foreign style,--I don’t know which
country’s, though. There were sidewalks with willow-trees,--and there
are no sidewalks in ordinary Japanese roads,--and brick houses, two
stories high, and with no basement. Horse-cars were running, but they
would not be on the track after ten in the evening. Many jinrikishas
were running, too, and some half a dozen of them were waiting for
customers at each corner. But not a shadow of a cab was to be seen
anywhere. To tell the truth, I never thought of finding one then, its
existence in the world being unknown to me at that time. There were a
good many wonders in store for me in the shops, and I never grew
tired of inspecting them. One curious thing was that here and there
at the notion stores boys were playing hand-organs, probably to draw
customers in. So I thought, anyway, and every time I passed I obliged
them awhile by listening to their music. As I strolled on, I came
across a sign with “Shiruko” in large letters on it. Shiruko is a sort
of pudding, made of sweet bean sauce and rice dumpling, and served hot.
To be sure, it made my mouth water, but I went on reading a bill over
the wall. There were twelve varieties of shiruko, it said, styled after
the names of the months, and any one who could finish eating all of
them at one time, would get a prize besides the return of the price!
How I wished that I had a big stomach!

The sight of Broadway was prettier in the evening, when the sidewalks
would be lined with hundreds of stalls. I shall have occasion to
describe them later, and so let me now mention one thing which I
never remember without a smile. It was an illumination on a holiday
evening--not of the whole street, but of only one building, and that of
two stories, I remember. It was a newspaper office. And as newspapers
are always giving us something new, this building, I think, awoke one
morning to give us what was very new at that time. It girdled itself
just once with an iron pipe half an inch in diameter, which twisted
itself into some characters in the front, and awaited a holiday
evening. The paper advertised that everybody should come to see how
they were going to celebrate the holiday evening. So the whole city
turned out, and all my folks, too. Hand-organs in the stores around
began a concert, and people waited with their mouths open. The time
came, and lights were seen running from both ends like serpents,
closing up in the centre. Wonder of wonders! “DAILY NEWS OFFICE” in
gaslight appeared!

I must tell you one more adventure I had, and that was an excursion
into the foreign settlement. As I came to the city I met with a
foreigner once in a while. I wondered how I should feel if I but
plunged into their crowd and spoke with them, if possible. So one day,
with a curious mind, I started for the place where the foreigners lived
together, about a mile from my home. As I neared the settlement I made
several discoveries. First, the houses looked very prim and square,
straight up and down, painted white, or in some light color. When
viewed from a distance they looked as if they were so many gravestones
in a temple yard. Unfortunately, it was the only comparison that
occurred to a country boy. As I looked again, I found out another fact.
That was, that while Japanese houses were nestling under the trees,
foreign houses were above them. In fact, there was nothing more than
low bushes around the houses. So my conclusion was that foreigners
lived in gravestone-like houses, and did not like tall trees, being
tall themselves, perhaps. As I entered a street I found everything
just contrary to my expectation. Streets were deserted instead of
being thronged; only one or two people and a dog were seen crossing.
I went on, when, as luck would have it, I neared a Catholic temple
from which two men, or women,--I could not distinguish which,--dressed
in black, with hoods of the same color, came! How dismal, I thought,
and immediately took to my heels till I came to another part of the
street where the houses faced the sea. I wanted to see a boy or a girl,
anyway, if I could not find a crowd. As I looked I saw something white
at one of the gates, and what was my delight when I found it to be a
little girl! I approached her, but not very near, as we could not talk
to each other. I just kept at an admiring distance. I stood there, one
eye on her and the other on the sea, lest I should drive her in by
looking at her with both my eyes, and began to examine her. What a
pretty creature she was! With her face white as a lily and her cheeks
pink as a cherry flower, she stood there watching me. Her light hair
was parted, a blue ribbon being tied on one side like a butterfly. She
had on a white muslin dress with a belt to match the ribbon, but what
was my astonishment to find that I could not see any dress beyond her
knees! I could not believe it at first, but the dress stopped short
there, and the slender legs, covered with something black,--I did not
care what,--were shooting out. Might not some malicious person have cut
it so? “Oh, please, for mercy’s sake, cover them,” was my thought. “I
don’t care if you have a long dress, the skirt trailing on the ground.”
But was I mistaken in my standard of criticism? I looked at myself,
and, sure enough, my kimono reached down to my feet!




CHAPTER V

MY NEW SCHOOL

    Tomo-chan--The Men with Wens--A Curious Punishment--How I
    Experienced It--Kotoro-kotoro.


Of course I attended another school as soon as we were settled. And
every morning I went with my Tomo-chan.

But I must tell you who Tomo-chan was. She--yes, _she_--was the adopted
daughter of my aunt, of about the same age as I, and in the same class
at school. I wish I had space enough to tell you how she came to be
adopted, but I shall have to be contented just with telling you that
the main cause of her becoming a member of my aunt’s family was all
through me. Aunty had no child, but she had found how lovely a child
is, even if he be mischievous, through my short visit two years before,
which I have had no occasion to tell you about. Now one of the first
principles in physics says that nature abhors a vacuum. This means that
it is unnatural for a place to have nothing in it. I had gone back: who
was to fill my place? So Tomo-chan, a better and certainly prettier
child than I, slipped into my shoes.

Aunty wished us to be good friends. So I called on her every morning
on my way to school, and in the afternoon we went over our lesson
together. Arithmetic was not very hard for me, and so I helped her over
pitfalls of calculation, while she did the same for me with reading.
Girls remember very well, but do not care to reason things out, it
seems. And indeed, Tomo-chan remembered even the number of mistakes I
made in reading. Now what one can do in half a day, two can accomplish
in half an hour, was the philosophy that came to me from our case; for
our drudgery was over in no time, and we were going through Tomo-chan’s
treasure of nice pictures and books of fairy-tales. There was a
picture in one of the books of an old man with a wen on his cheek,
dancing before a crowd of demons and goblins. “Look here, what is
this?” I asked. She laughed at the picture and would not tell me about
it till she had thoroughly enjoyed laughing. That is the way of a girl.
But with “O dear!” she started thus:

“One day, this old man with a wen happened to fall into a crowd of
those ugly monsters, and was made to dance. He danced very well, and so
was asked to come again the next day. The goblins wanted something for
a pledge for his keeping his word and so removed the wen from the man’s
cheek. The old man was very glad to part with it, and went home, when
he met another man with a wen.” She turned the leaf to show another
picture. This time the new man was dancing before the weird crowd.
“You see, this man was told how he could remove his wen, and is now
showing his skill before them to induce them to ask for the pledge. But
he did not have any practice at all in dancing and so was just jumping
round. And the goblins got angry over his deceit, and sent him back
with the wen that the old man had left.” Turning the leaf, “Here he is
with wens on both his cheeks!”

She laughed again, and I could not help laughing with her, too. At this
moment some one was coming up the stairs.

“Why, is this the way you study your lesson?”

It was aunty who entered the room as she said: “I am surprised at you.”
And she laid down a tray with a teapot and cups and a dish of cakes on
it. The sight made us happy all at once, and Tomo-chan explained to her
how soon we had finished our study.

“Why, Ei-chan helped me in arithmetic, so we finished a long, long time
ago.”

“Well, Ei-chan is a good boy, isn’t he?” said aunty. Boys feel awkward
to be well spoken of to their face, and my speech failed me somehow.
By the way, I was no longer “Bot’chan.”

The school I found much larger and finer than the village one. The
pupils numbered ten times more. Each class had its own room, and boys
and girls marched in and out in procession every hour. It was so much
more orderly and systematic than the village school that there was less
of “out-of-tune” matter. But then there was one thing that puzzled me.
It was that often a boy was seen standing in the hallway with a bowl of
water in his hands. Sometimes he stood there motionless until the class
was all dismissed. But I was not slow to divine the cause. What puzzled
me was the question: “How could that be the best form of punishment?”
While a boy stood there he need not attend the class. That was
certainly easy for an idle boy. And then there was no pain to endure.
As to the holding of a bowl, why, did I not hold my bowl of rice every
meal and not know even if it was heavy or light? But another solution
suggested itself to me; it might have the same effect on the offender
as wearing a cap with “I am a Fool,” written on it. He stood there, and
everybody thought he was a bad boy. “It might be, it might be,” I said,
congratulating myself on the happy solution, when a crow that had just
alighted on a branch of the elm by the gate repeated, “It might be!” I
threw a stone at him without thinking that it was a violation of the
school rule, and, if discovered, I might have undergone the punishment.

At any rate, I was destined, it appeared, to undergo the punishment
once at least. And it happened in this way.

At this school, boys were not allowed to carry iron tops or even
hand-balls. There were too many of them, and if they should all indulge
in these sports, there would be constant danger of breaking their legs
or knocking their noses off. So comparatively harmless footballs were
provided. Now, one noon recess, ten of us wanted to have a game. We
were divided into parties of five and played. Of course we had no rules
to go by, but tried to carry the ball within the enemy’s lines by every
means. One time we fumbled furiously near the building, and, in the
heat of our tackling, one fellow seized the ball and kicked it without
minding in which direction he was aiming. If he had had less skill the
ball would have gone only over the roof and dropped on the head of a
jinrikisha man running on the other street. But as it was, it went
madly against a window-pane and smashed it all to pieces. What a noise
it made! For a minute it made all the boys and girls playing on the
ground keep quite still. And in this awful suspense a teacher appeared
and caught the five, I among the number, who were still in the position
of fumbling, together with the poor fellow who did the kicking, and
who stood dazed, unable to recover as yet from the shock of his late
experience. I didn’t know how the other four escaped being caught, but
I was glad that they did.

There was no question in the teacher’s mind but that all six should
be exhibited in the hallway, and so we were made to stand there, each
holding a bowl of water. Now I had an ample opportunity to learn every
significance of this form of punishment. Naturally, we felt merry
at first. In the first place, there was something unreasonable and
ludicrous in the way at least five of us came to stand there. And then
when you have companions in your bad luck, you feel surely light of
heart. And so we did. But when fifteen, thirty minutes passed, our legs
got to be stiff and the weightless bowls began to weigh very much in
our hands. Indeed, the slightest inclination would spill the water!
But why did we not drink some of it, you may say? Well, we should have
done it, but we knew that it must all be there when the teacher came.
Forty-five minutes, and the bell rang for the dismissal. All the boys
and girls poured out, leaving us alone. Ah, that is the saddest moment
for any schoolboy, for after that the school is dismal as a prison.
Fifteen minutes more, and all the teachers, except the one in charge of
us, were gone. None of us dared to look up, our heads being bent with
extreme sorrow. Presently a weak-minded fellow dropped his china and
cried out. It was not I, but we were all ready to follow his example,
when the teacher came out, and, removing the bowls, read us a lecture
before sending us home.

We lost our courage, even to run out of the school compound, but
dragged slowly home. But when I turned the first corner whom should I
meet but my Tomo-chan?

“Why, Tomo-chan!” I looked at her in surprise.

“I could not go home without you. So I waited for you. But isn’t it a
shame for teacher to punish you without your deserving it?” she said.

“We did not want to let Takeda suffer alone, you know.”

My answer was a surprise even to me. Of course, I did not think to the
contrary, but I was not impressed with the significance of it till I
put it into words and--to her. It came as a new thought to me. Our
hearts became light, the thing was forgotten, and only the prospect
of the fine time we should have that golden afternoon in late summer
occupied our minds.

“Come along,” I said. “Let’s go to the field!”

And we hastened on briskly, and, throwing our things into our houses on
the way, went to the field, green with cool, cushion-like grass. About
a dozen boys and girls were already waiting for us, and we just jumped
among them.

“What shall we play?” said one.

“Let’s have Kotoro-kotoro,” suggested another.

“That’s fun!” all shouted.

To play the game, we must first select from the boys one “chief” to
protect his “sons and daughters,” and one “imp” to catch them. The boys
stand in a circle and are ready to say “Jan-ken-pon,” and to hammer
with their fists. At “pon” you make one of three shapes with your hand.
When your hand is spread, that denotes a sheet of paper; when two
fingers only are stretched, that means a pair of scissors; and when
your hand is held closed, it signifies a stone. A sheet of paper can be
cut by scissors, but the latter is ineffectual on a stone. But a stone
can be wrapped by a sheet of paper. Hence, each one can defeat one of
the rest, but is conquered by the other. To simplify the matter, you
can use only two of the three shapes. The one who wins at first is to
be the chief, the one who is ultimately defeated, the imp. So we began:
“Jan-ken-pon!”

Only three won. Then those three tried again.

“Jan-ken-pon!”

I won; and so was the chief. The rest went on jan-ken-ponning till the
imp was decided.

Now all except the imp held firmly each other’s belt on the back, in
a line, with me at the head. It is a pity you don’t have any belt on
your dress, and so play the sport. It is very convenient to us. Apart
from its use in sport, when we meet a robber, we throw him down by
jiu-jitsu, and, untying our belt, bind him up hand and foot! But to
return. I was ready with the imp in front and with my “little ones”
behind, like the body of a centipede. The imp could not touch me; he
could only seize any one behind. I stretched my arms, ran to and fro
to prevent the imp from getting round to my flanks. The line swayed,
rolled, jerked like a serpent in a rapid flight. And the motion would
all but throw weak-armed ones off their holds. But they merrily
persisted, and could have held on longer but for their mirth being
worked up too high by the very manner of the imp himself.

The boy who played that part was a born comedian. He loved his fun more
than his bread. Once in the midst of his supper he heard a man come
with a monkey dressed in a kimono. No sooner than he recognized that by
the sound of a drum, he threw away his chop-sticks, and, running out of
his house, danced all way up the street with the professional monkey
as his wondering spectator. Now in playing his part as the imp, he did
not go about it like an eagle intent on his prey. But he brought all
his talent into full play in every motion of his body, suggestive of
some grotesque form, heightened by a queer ejaculation. When, in his
series of performances, he imitated a pig, flapping his hands from his
head like large ears of the animal and grunting, Gr-r-r-r, Gr-r-r-r,
it caused everybody to burst into laughter. At this moment he made
a sudden turn, which caused such a jerk to the line, that, being
absent-minded from merriment, they were all thrown out of their hold,
each rolling on the grass, but still laughing at the grunting. The imp
could now jump at anybody for his prey, but as a true comedian, he also
rolled on the grass, laughing with the rest.




CHAPTER VI

CHINESE EDUCATION

    My Chinese Teacher--How I Was Taught--Versification--My Uncle--Clam
    Fishing--A Flatfish.


Some months after I entered the public school, my father came to a
conclusion that what was taught there was too modern to have enough
of culture value. My education had to be supplemented by the study of
Chinese classics. And his intention would have been of great benefit to
me if he had been equally wise in selecting a good private teacher. As
it was, I gained but a fraction of it, undergoing a hard struggle.

There lived a Chinese scholar near by, who was second to none in his
learning within three miles. Formerly he was a priest of Zen sect, the
Unitarian of Buddhism. As it was considered most laudable to a man
of his calling, he never ate fish or meat, and had two frugal meals a
day, taking only a cupful of starch and sugar in the evening, till he
came to lead a secular life. Starch and sugar!--so he must have come to
have such white hair, I thought. Anyway, the snowy mass heightened the
expression of his earnest face, rather youthful for a man of sixty. He
was, indeed, the classic itself; the rhythm of it seemed to be ringing
in his veins, whether awake or asleep. And he delighted in nothing so
much as to eat his dinner listening to the clear-voiced chanting of
boys reviewing their lesson, as if they were minstrels entertaining at
a king’s feast! And, of course, I was sent to him.

I started from the beginning, which was, indeed, no beginning at all.
The Chinese sages did not write their scriptures as graded school
text-books, but their descendants believed so, anyhow. Genesis was the
genesis of successful mastery. And so I began with that great sentence
in the “Book of Great Learning:”

  “Learning is a gateway to virtue.”

I envy those boys who tore Chinese authors, and whose books, when taken
to a second-hand bookstore, were not bought even for a penny. My books
were, on the contrary, just as clean as ever, as if they had been too
loath to impart anything to the owner. And this was not from any effort
on my part to take care of them, but simply from the little use I
made of them. Now this was the way I studied them. Teacher would read
with me about four pages in advance, and see once how I could read. I
stuck; he prompted me; I stuck again; he prompted me again; I stuck for
the third time, and for the third time he prompted me, and so on, and
indeed continually, if I had gone on till I had thoroughly mastered
it. But one review seemed to him sufficient for such _easy_ passages,
and my boyish heart responded too gladly to be released after a short
lesson. And I laid my book by till the next day. I did not know how the
teacher regarded me, but he must have thought me a very bright fellow
for whom such a slow process as review was totally unnecessary. And
he immediately took up the next four pages and went on in the usual
manner. The first book was finished; the teacher’s instinct asserted
itself, and he wanted me to read a few pages by way of a test before I
proceeded. What a shame! I only recognized a box here and a starfish
there, and that was all. The teacher was angry at the result. He saw
that I was not prepared yet to take up the classics. And with his
admirable pedagogical insight, he sent me to a primer the very next
day. It was a Japanese history, written in easy Chinese prose. How I
enjoyed the change! The passages rolled off on my tongue as easily as
you might say, “Mary had a little lamb.” The teacher smiled at my
ease, and soon recovered his humor. But his eyes were so constructed
as to see nothing but the top and the foot of a mountain, and his mind
worked like a spring-board, which either stays low or jumps high up.
And on the third day I was ordered to begin the second book of the
classics, called the “Doctrine of Mean!”

And I plodded on. I went through the “Book of Divination,” and “Odes of
Spring and Autumn,” and came out only with some phantoms of angular,
mysterious hieroglyphics dancing before my eyes. But my Chinese
education included something more than reading. It was versification.
Just think of requiring a ten-year-old boy to write verse in Latin or
Greek. But every Saturday I was required to do the same sort of thing
for two years. Oh, how I struggled! I hunted for something sensible
to write, but while all sorts of nonsense would come up, even common
sense, that most useful guide in a prosaic field, fled from me.
Outside, merry shouts of boys--a happy group who cared for balls and
kites more than dry-as-dust “culture”--were heard, and I mused in a
corner of a room, consulting such help as a phrase book and a rhyming
dictionary. Nothing but doggerel could be born of such a forced labor.
Here is a specimen:

  “Shut from the blue of skies in spring,
    I sit and fret for words to rhyme.
  O bird, if you have songs to sing,
    Drop one for me to save my time!”

The Chinese training did me at least one good turn. It drove Confucius
out of my head!

I should have been a blighted boy if Sundays had not come to my rescue.
The real use to which the day should be put had not dawned on me, nor
was it in the mind of those who introduced the institution. But I am
glad to say that it did me good in many ways. With this, however, my
uncle is invariably associated.

I have not said anything about him, but he was a well-fed man with a
goat’s beard. He was very nervous, however, and could not keep from
pulling his beard. This accounted for its scantiness. It was very
amusing to observe how easily his temper was disturbed out of its
normal mood. When he was contradicted he pulled hard at his beard and
wrung his hands furiously. His body seemed to expand with the inner
fire when he ejaculated many an “Ahem!” preliminary to an eruption.
Everybody had to find shelter and thrust his fingers into his ears,
lest the drums should break. But when he was pleased, his face melted
with laughter; he went to a cupboard to look for some nice thing for
us, ordered dinner to be hurried for our sake, and went round and round
us to see if we were really comfortable.

He was very alert, and was always looking for a new thing. He did
well, too, to keep himself abreast of the age, and, indeed, mastered
something of the English language, of which he could well boast in his
day. His pronunciation, however, was rather painful to hear, and in his
talk with foreigners his nervous hands played a large part to fill in
the gaps in his vocabulary, with an intermixture of many a “you know.”

One good thing about him was his love for outdoor sports. He could not
sit all day like my Chinese teacher, and if ever an eruption occurred,
it was always on the occasion of such confinement to his room. His
Sundays were scheduled for this or that kind of pleasure excursion. And
of course I was wise enough to do what I could to please him in order
that I might not be left out of his party.

One Sunday we were to go clam-fishing. When it was announced on Friday
before, I thought of a great time and could hardly sleep for joy. After
a tedious labor of writing verse was over the next Saturday, I busied
myself the rest of the afternoon with the preparation for the next
day. I kept going to my uncle’s to see whether we had the same things
that they had, and also to suggest the necessity of providing things
we had and they had not. Many conferences for this purpose were held
at the door-sill with Tomo-chan. Small hand-rakes were bought, one for
each; small and large baskets, knives, thick-soled socks, small sashes,
and so forth, were collected from various sources. To this I added a
net three by four feet large, with two poles to meet the exigency of
encountering some large fish--perhaps a whale. But of this I did not
speak to anybody.

Mother was also busy preparing our lunch. For this she got up very
early in the morning and boiled rice, which she made into triangular,
round, or square masses, speckled with burned sesame seeds. She
packed them in several lacquered boxes, with fresh pickles and cooked
vegetables. We relied on our clams for chief dishes; so some cooking
utensils were necessary. Also some tea and a teapot, cups and dishes,
together with chop-sticks and toothpicks, even.

The day was not fair, but it was just the kind of weather for the
season, dull and somewhat hazy, but bespeaking a calm sea. The tide was
fast ebbing when we started in a boat. There was a good company of us,
including uncle, aunt, mother, Tomo-chan, and me. As we emerged into
the bay from the canal, the extended view was delightful. On one side
green masses of pine-trees overhung the stone mounds and merged into
a leafy hill, which stretched itself like an arm into the sea. On the
other, beyond reedy shoals, the old forts, with a lighthouse on one of
them, dotted the expanse. The view was washed in gray, and even the
sails of junks, hanging lazily from the masts, were scarcely lighter
than the background.

All was calm. But as we sighted from a distance some other parties
already on the scene, we soon forgot everything for the excitement
and let the boatman hurry with all his strength. It was nine when we
arrived at the desired spot, and we had three hours to enjoy ourselves.
We fixed our boat to a pole, from the top of which was drooping a
piece of red and white cloth. This served as our mark to enable us to
find the boat quickly in the case of need. So each party had something
of its own design. Purple, green, white, and red in all sorts of
combinations and forms were displayed, while a coat, a shirt, or even
an improvised scarecrow was not denied use.

So we went into water, our sleeves and skirts being tied up and
our legs bared to the knees. Each was provided with a basket and a
hand-rake--except myself, who, in addition to the implements, took out
secretly my net, wound round the poles. My people were all too busy to
observe me, however. We went on raking for clams. There seemed to be
lots of black or white shells which we did not want, but I soon found
that clams were rather a matter of chance, and a chance would come no
more than once in every fifteen minutes! I luckily struck on three nice
ones in a short time, and dug diligently for some thirty minutes, but
without any result. So I grew tired, and began inspection. Aunt had
ten, mother eight, and uncle five. When I approached him, he looked up,
red in the face. I wondered if he was not angry. But it was not so, for
he heaved a sigh and straightening up and striking his back with his
fist, said, “O dear!”

“Uncle, you will soon be quitting your job, just as I shall, I think,”
said I.

“Pshaw! How many have you?”

“Three, sir.”

“You can’t have more than that for your lunch, you understand, unless
you get more. Now don’t be in my way.” And again he doubled his
corpulent body to work. But I was right in thinking that he could not
keep himself in the same posture for another three minutes. Now I
passed on to Tomo-chan. Poor Tomo-chan had only two! She was all but
weeping for the bad luck. She, however, looked comforted to find that I
did not fare much better. But what was her surprise when I threw all my
clams in with hers!

“Keep them, Tomo-chan. I am going to fish with this net.” Her eyes
looked gratitude. “Oh, thank you ever so much. But I’ll catch fish with
you if I don’t fare any better.”

“All right.” And I went on thinking that if I could not get clams for
my lunch, I should have fish to the envy of all. I looked among the
rocks for some shadow of them. Surely I saw something shooting away now
and then, without waiting for me to find out whether it was large or
not. But anyway, they were all right if I could get a number of them,
and so I fixed my net and tried to drive them into it, little thinking
that the very whiteness of my net--I appropriated a net made for the
purpose of keeping flies off--scared every fish. I got irritated with
my ill-success, and finally splashed the water vigorously to punish
them.

By this time my uncle had quit his work, as I predicted, and was
engaging with hen-like anxiety to look after his flock. He kept his
eyes on them, and would go like a shepherd dog to fetch any one who
went too far away from the boat. He looked at his watch to see if
the tide was not turning on, and went occasionally to the boat to
see if anything was lost. He seemed to like this kind of work better
than clam-fishing, for I could see even from a distance that he was
pulling at his beard, as he was wont to do when his mind was occupied.
Presently he heard me splashing the water far away, and started at once
to bring me back. Time could not be lost, he must have thought, but I
did not know anything of his approach till I heard a shriek behind me.
Surprised, I turned round when I found him just recovering his balance
and looking intently into the water.

“What’s matter, uncle?” I hastened toward him.

“Stop. A flatfish somewhere.” Seeing me with a net, he exclaimed,
“Quick with your net.”

“A flatfish?” I queried in excitement.

“Yes, I stepped on him and he gave me a slip.... Oh, here he is; cover
him quick!” And we covered him with my net without much ado. I was
surprised to see how easily I could catch him compared with other fish
that I had tried for. As I raised him, however, I found he was already
crushed dead under my uncle’s weight!

But it was a large one, and I could have an honorable share at lunch.

[Illustration: A TYPICAL JAPANESE STREET.]




CHAPTER VII

AN EVENING FÊTE

    My Father--His Love for Potted Trees--A Local Fête--Show
    Booths--Goldfish Booths--Singing Insects--How a Potted Tree Was
    Bought.


Evenings were not without enjoyment for me. And for this I owe much to
my father.

My father was a silent, close-mouthed man. His words to children were
few and mostly in a form of command. They were never disobeyed, partly
because it was father who spoke, but more because we knew that he spoke
only when he had to. Indeed, he carried a formidable air about him,
apparently engrossed in thought somewhat removed from his immediate
concern. He was by no means philosophical, however, and his reticent
habit was born of the peculiar circumstances under which he was
laboring. Fortune was evidently against him. And partly out of sympathy
with him and partly out of fear of breaking his spell, when we had
something to ask of him--boys have many wants--we had some indirect
means to devise. Thus, when my cap had worn out and I wanted a new one,
I dropped a hint in his presence by way of a soliloquy: “I wish I had a
new cap. My old one is worn out.” Saying this just once at a time and
thrice in the course of one evening, if I persevered for three nights,
I used to have my old cap replaced with a new one on the next day!

He knew that he was fighting against odds, but his spirit was never
crushed. He only persevered. One day he came back from his evening
stroll with a piece of bamboo flute. Evidently he was attracted by a
tune a man at the corner of a street was playing on it as he sold his
wares, and felt his soul suddenly gain its freedom and soar to the sky.
I remember how well he loved his instrument, and from day to day he
used to pour out low, mournful tunes. But his art was never equal to
the demand of his soul, and one evening the bamboo flute was laid aside
for a pot containing a dwarf pine-tree.

You may well wonder how a flowerless potted tree could be preferred to
even the commonest tune for spiritual solace. But at any rate it was a
piece of nature, and was healing to behold. And then, in its fantastic
shape, there was a beauty of repose which had a very soothing effect,
but which required some study for appreciation. But in his case, there
was something deeper in the matter. A tree over fifty years old, which,
if left in the field, would have grown to an immense size, was reduced
by human art to only a foot in height, and was kept alive on a potful
of earth. My father must have read a history of his own in it and tried
to learn a secret of contentment from it.

One by one potted trees were added to his stock,--he could afford to
buy only at odd intervals,--and presently shelves were provided for
them in the small garden. Morning and evening he attended to them, and
with patience as well as with pleasure looked forward to the time when
his care would result in a growth of just an inch and a quarter of pine
leaves and palm leaves two inches by three in size.

One night an unexpected thing happened. A thief found his way to the
garden from the back door and sneaked away with half a dozen of the
choice trees. Naturally, my father was distressed, but after a while he
was patiently filling the vacancy one by one, of course seeing that the
back door should be securely locked every night.

I was going to tell you something about the amusements I had in the
evening, but it was mainly due to this love of my father’s for potted
trees that I was taken regularly to a local fête, held three times a
month. The day for this was fixed; it fell on every day connected
with, the number seven; that is, the seventh, the seventeenth, and the
twenty-seventh. And as in the calendar, rain or shine, it came and
went. Naturally, I had my weather bureau open on that day to see if
the evening was all right, for a wet night would be an irretrievable
loss. At the police stand they published a forecast in the morning, but
that was not to be too much relied on. It sometimes said rain when it
was anything but wet, and fine when it was actually drizzling--though
in the latter case I rather inclined to believe the report even if it
ended in sorrow.

I did not need any formality of asking to be taken; it was a matter
of course with me as long as I behaved well. This behaving, however,
was peculiar. I had to be waiting for my father outside and follow him
when he came out, without saying anything or shouting for delight for a
block or so. The reason for this was simple. Mother objected to sending
out the younger members of our family in the evening, and especially
to such a crowded place where they were liable to be lost. My going
there must not attract their attention.

One evening I slipped off with my father in this way. The place where
the fête was held was not far away, and after two or three turnings
we soon came to the street. At a distance, you might take it for a
fire, for the tiny stalls and booths crowding the place were lighted
by hundreds of kerosene torches which flared and smoked. The central
section of the street was not more than two blocks in length, but it
was literally packed with six rows of booths and stalls and with such a
concourse of people that there did not seem to be room even to move.

The approach to the scene was marked by some show booths. Hung in front
were some wonderful pictures of what was to be seen within: a serpent
over thirty feet long, which had lived in some distant part of the
country and had actually swallowed two babies; a woman who had a real
rubber neck which could be stretched so far that while sitting still
her head could wander all over the house; monkeys dressed in old-style
costume and giving some theatrical performance, and so on. The entrance
fee was a penny, and men stood outside crying the various excellencies
of their shows, and when you stopped before one of them and looked at
the sign, they would lift the curtain for a second and drop it again,
just to whet your curiosity. I naturally wanted very much to look at
some of the monstrosities, and watched to see if the inducement would
work on my father, but, much to my disappointment, he walked calmly on
with his hands in his sleeves.

Now we came in front of the goldfish booths. It was simply fascinating
to see such a number of dear little things swimming in wooden tubs,
some being hung high in glass globes by the side of helpless turtles
enjoying air riding. In the next two or three booths were masses of
minute bamboo cages. Most of them were only three inches by two. Here
they were selling all sorts of singing insects and fire-worms. And what
an orchestra these tiny winged things were! There were bell insects
which chirped on “chinkororin, chinkororin,” in staccato, crickets
which hummed in sweet undulating “rin--rin--rin,” and katydids which
broke in with a cymbal-like “gaja, gaja,” as we say. I watched to see
if these things would tempt my father, but no, his face was set on
something else ahead.

Now a great part of these enterprising peddlers were gardeners by
profession. And out of the six rows of booths in the central portion
three were shows of potted flowers and trees. They even had for sale
grown-up trees half as tall as a telegraph-pole! As we came to this
part my father slackened his pace. Here was something at last which
interested him. He took time to examine some of the nice potted trees,
and his progress was very slow indeed, somewhat to my annoyance. I
would rather have him stop before a candy booth than in these places.
After a while, however, he found one tree much to his liking. He was
tempted just to ask the price of it.

“Ten dollars, sir,” was the answer.

My father smiled dryly and passed on.

“How much you give, Mister?” asked the man.

No answer.

“I’ll make it five dollars this time, Mister,” cried the man. Still
receiving no answer, he came after us. “But give me your price, Mister.”

“Fifty cents,” said my father.

“Ough, that won’t pay even the express. Give me a dollar, then.”

But my father was already some distance away. The man, growing
desperate to lose him, cried aloud:

“Mi-ster, you can have it for the price. This is the first one I have
sold this evening. I must start the sale, anyway.”

So my father came into possession of one more potted tree. The price
was low, to be sure, but the man did not undersell his goods.

There seemed to be nothing now to do but to wend our way home as my
father turned round at the corner and came down with the crowd. We
passed toy booths, basket booths, booths where hairpins with beautiful
artificial flowers were sold, or where all sorts of fans, bamboo
screens, and sundry other things were for sale. And we passed them
apparently without any interest, at least on my father’s part. I was
wondering what my father would buy for me, when whom should I meet but
my aunt and Tomo-chan just going round the street in the other way?
I spoke with Tomo-chan while my father and aunt were exchanging some
remarks--possibly about the potted tree.

“Did you get something bought for you?” I asked.

“No, not yet. I’ve just come, you know. And you?”

“N-no. But--”

I could not say the rest as my father and aunt parted and the crowd was
pushing between us, and so I waved my hand to say good-by to Tomo-chan.

We soon came almost to the end of the gay portion of the street, and
after a few booths a touch of festival air would be gone, when my
father halted before a molasses candy booth, and, to my great joy,
bought a nickel’s worth of cake. We got a big, swollen bagful; this
was for me and for our stay-at-home folks. I wished that I had met
Tomo-chan once more.




CHAPTER VIII

SUMMER DAYS

    A Swimming School--How I Was Taught to Swim--Diving--The Old
    Home Week--Return of the Departed Souls--Visiting the Ancestral
    Graves--The Memorable Night--A Village Dance.


The third summer in Tokyo had come. The air was fresh and cool, while
the morning-glories in our back yard were blooming lavishly, and the
Ainu chrysanthemums in white, pink, and purple, and the late irises
were seen carried round the street in flower-venders’ baskets. But it
soon got warmer as they vanished from the sight till I found it hot
even in one piece of a thin garment over my body, though my mother
starched it for me just stiff enough for the air to pass through from
one sleeve to the other.

In one of the canals near by, an annual swimming-school was opened.
The place was inviting in hot weather, besides, it was such fun to
bathe with hosts of boys, and to learn how to swim. I must confess that
I could not swim yet. I thought at first that it was quite an easy
thing, because I often saw a man swimming with his feet and performing
such a trick with his hands as peeling a pear with a knife and eating
it. But after a few trials I was obliged to correct my notion to such
a degree as to consider swimming an extremely difficult as well as
dangerous undertaking. Not only my body was found to be something
between a block of hard wood and a stone, and much nearer to the
latter, but once it stayed so long in the water, head and all, that I
experienced pretty nearly what it was to get drowned. But all this I
did in secret and did not tell to any of my folks. Indeed my mother
was keeping my younger brother from the water by telling him about the
story of a sea-monkey who would stretch his exceptionally long arm and
drag people into the depths, especially boys who went swimming against
their mother’s remonstrance. As an elder brother, I was bound to set a
good example.

A week after the opening of the school, however, I brought the
swimming matter to my mother’s attention, and piling up such reasons
as I thought most expedient, and rounding up by mentioning names of
a number of my schoolmates, as if they were co-petitioners, who had
been enrolled in the membership, I wanted her to ask my father. I had
anticipated a refusal from both mother and father, but my mother was
all right as long as the place was safe, while my father surprised me
by his instant permission. He was an excellent swimmer himself and must
have felt it a shame that his son did not know even how to keep himself
afloat. My poor younger brother, however, was to wait another year.

So I went to swimming. We had an exciting time in the canal, and the
heat of the sun ceased to be of any trouble to me. On the first day one
of the trainers supported me with his hands and made me move my arms
and legs according to his instruction. I made a vigorous effort, while
he carried me on as if I were making a progress myself. Now and then,
however, he would loosen his hold and see if I could keep myself going.
I was then taken with sudden fear, and, feeling that the water grew
instantly to be very deep, I gave a cry of horror and distress, and did
some splashing, too. The instructor laughed over my plight and told me
that I should be safe as he was near, and that I must try to acquire
the sense of ease with the water. As long as my limbs were moving
properly, I was sure to be floating. So I put confidence in his words
and cultivated assiduously what he called the sense of ease, which I
understood to be a suppression of fear. The first day, however, passed
without any result, in spite of my determination that I would go to
the bottom rather than call for help again.

But, strangely enough, at the very first unassisted trial on the second
day, my body did float. How joyful I felt at this, you can hardly
imagine. I swam round and round the place--of course stopping every
quarter of a minute--till I was fairly exhausted. On my return home,
however, I mustered courage enough to impart to my brother on the
matted floor my successful experience in swimming.

Diving came next. On my first dip I felt instinctively that man and
fish were at the opposite extremities of creation. The suppression of
breath and the closing of eyes were bad enough; but there was such a
roaring in my ears as if all the watery spirits were murmuring at the
intrusion, while my body was at once subjected to a different law of
repulsion. But it was great fun to play at being a sea-monkey and drag
the legs of idle boys, at which sport I had been a victim myself on
the very first day. So I began practising it, and in a few days was
already looking for a chance to apply my half-mastered skill. Seeing
once two boys near me engaging in splashing water, I plunged at once,
aiming at one of them. It was but a few yards to dive, but I came out
of the water without striking anything, and before I had time to brush
off the dripping water from my eyes, I was subjected to a furious
spray from the two boys, when, thud, came something on my side, and in
another second I was dragged into the water. A mouthful of water went
down my throat before I knew, and when I came to my feet with all the
water boiling around me, I noticed a third and new boy standing and
laughing over his trick!

So passed a good part of the summer till about the middle of August,
when the Japanese “Old Home Week” came. The principal day falls on the
sixteenth day of the seventh month, according to the lunar calendar,
which is about a month after the ordinary date. It is a sort of
Decoration Day, too, because we go to the temple yards and pay a visit
to our ancestral graves. Now for three years this duty was neglected by
us, and father thought it proper for some one to visit the old place
in the country. My uncle was also in a similar position, and it was
arranged that my aunt and Tomo-chan should go from their family while
I represented my own. And two days before the date we set out in a
conveyance called a kuruma.

I wasn’t quite sure of the significance of the graveyard visiting on
this special occasion, and so found time to ask my aunt of it. And
this was what she told me, not on the road, but in her house the night
before we started. (I had known the inconvenience of the kuruma in
keeping me separate from my aunt all the way, though it had the decided
merit, as it turned out, of packing Tomo-chan and myself in one seat.)

Now, when a man dies, he goes either to paradise or to hell, according
to Buddhism. In the former place, he is led to his seat on a large
lotus flower floating on the cool surface of the rippling water. The
sweet calmness of the summer morn is all his, my aunt said, but beyond
that there seems to be nothing going on in that floral berth. But in
hell, all is excitement. The king of devils will mete out punishment to
each arrival according to his guilt, and he is made by red and green
demons to tread on the hill of swords, to ride in the coach of fire, or
to bathe in the boiling caldron. But, good or bad, those departed souls
are allowed once a year to pay a short visit to their earthly homes,
and this happens on the sixteenth of the seventh month. So we go to the
graves of our ancestors, clean and decorate them so that the dead may
feel comfortable, and, delivering our message of welcome and turning
about, ask the invisible to get on our backs to our homes! I wondered
if my back was large enough for the whole train of my ancestors to
ride on.

At my native village we stayed at another uncle’s. A day’s ride in the
same narrow kuruma made Tomo-chan and me more companionable than ever,
while the strangeness of the new place kept us two always close by.
Everywhere we were welcomed as Tokyonians, and treated to melons and
rice dumpling. We had not, however, much time to spare, for we were
quite busy seeing to our family graves. We hired a man to weed and
clean the lot, sent enough offerings to the temple so that the priests,
when chanting for the rest of the departed, might think comfortably
of it, and, above all, took care that every grave might not lack
fresh flowers for two days, that is during our stay. On the sixteenth
day I was prepared to carry any number of invisible spirits from the
graveyard to the house. But as some one told me that the spirits would
not dare to come in the daylight, I was glad that my service was not
needed, after all.

The sun set gloriously behind the castle, and the mellow booming of the
temple bell was wafted through the evening air. Presently the misty
moon, just waning, rose from the plain, and the memorable night began.
In every house the rooms were swept clean and the tiny lights were
burning in the household shrine. In front, the flames from a heap of
flax stems, known as the “reception fire,” were dazzling, and, unheard
and unobserved, the ghosts of our fathers passed into the house.

I did not know how long they would stay, but bowing once respectfully
before the shrine, I went out with Tomo-chan to stay around. In the
temple ground there was an open space hemmed in by tall, shady pines,
where the young people of the village would assemble that night
and hold the annual dancing. And naturally our steps were directed
there. We found that already many of them were gathered, and, by the
uncertain light of paper lanterns hung here and there on the trees, we
saw that they were all dressed in uniform white and blue garments, with
folded pieces of cloth dangling about their necks. The browned faces of
the swains were not distinguishable in such dimness, but those of the
lasses looked distinctly lovely, the scratches and blemishes incidental
to their outdoor occupation being invisible. The swains grouped on this
side and the girls on the other; the former being not yet bold enough,
and the latter too shy, to mingle with one another. Presently some
sweet-voiced lad sang a ballad, and then all rose to arrange themselves
in rows, boys on one side and girls on the other. They called to the
singer to start anew, and began to trip to the song, clapping their
hands at a rhythmic turn. They never moved on, but closed in and again
drew apart on the same spot, all repeating the same movement. It was a
novel thing for both of us, and we watched them with great delight.
Song after song was sung, all bursting into laughing cheers after each
piece and sometimes going into such commotion that each lad paired with
his bonny lassie.

“Isn’t that delightful?” I asked Tomo-chan.

“Yes, lovely.”

“And simple, too.”

She nodded.

“Let’s watch again and see if we can learn,” I said to her, and we
stood at the end of the line.

The song went clear and plaintive and the touching trill was preying
upon the hearts of the dancers and working them into dreamy ecstasy.
The moon by this time climbed high up in the sky, and when a filmy
cloud glided off her face, the pale weird rays revealed Tomo-chan and
me dancing in the group!




CHAPTER IX

THE ENGLISH SCHOOL

    A Night at the Dormitory--Beginning
    English--Grammar--Pronunciation--School Moved--Mother’s Love.


It was September and the beginning of a new term. Father decided that
I should leave the school I had attended hitherto and go to another
one where English was taught. This was the second time that I had
left school without finishing it, but I was destined not to fare any
better at the new place. Indeed, I changed school four times without
finishing, till I finally settled in a college. But this leaping
habit--I am sorry to say that it took a semblance of habit at last--did
not come from any changeableness on my or my father’s part, but all
from the sincere desire to prepare me for life in the best way.
This it was that drove me into the three years’ study of the Chinese
classics, though I beat a rather dishonorable retreat from it, and
again this it was that directed me to take up the foreign languages
early. I was afraid, however, that I leaped too much this time, as I
found that all my new schoolmates were much older than I, and, indeed,
there were some who needed shaving every morning!

The school was at first very near to my house. The building was of
brick; the first floor was used for the class-rooms and the second was
made into a dormitory. This last was a novelty to me; I never knew
before that boys stayed away from home in this fashion, and entertained
a secret desire to share a bed once with somebody, just to see what
it was like. This, however, was easily granted, as I soon grew to be
a favorite with everybody because of my youthfulness, and one night
I made a bundle of my night-shirt and went to the room of one of my
classmates. I was at once devoured with curiosity in watching him
make the bed. It was not such a simple process as I used to see at
home--laying one or two quilts on the matted floor and another over
them. But he had to build a bedstead first from a sliding door, and
placed one end of it on his table and the other on his bookcases. Upon
that he laid his thin quilt and blanket. I wondered why he had to do
such a crazy thing.

“Don’t you know the reason?” He seemed to be surprised at my ignorance.
“It is on account of the fleas. You can’t sleep on the floor. Look
here.” And he showed me a bottle in which an army of captured fleas
were drowned. After all, a dormitory was not a covetable place, I
thought. But there was some fascination in the sliding door bed, which
creaked like a cuckoo with every move of my body.

But I must tell you about my first experience in English. English
was very encouraging to start with. The alphabet consists of only
twenty-six letters, and when I mastered that and was provided with a
handful of vocabulary, I felt as if I were already half an American. I
went around and talked to everybody, especially to those who did not
know anything of English, like this:

“It is a dog. See the dog! It is a cow. See the cow!” I could even play
a trick by way of variation like this:

“Is it a dog? Yes, it is a dog.”

And my family, who were constantly spoken to in this unknown tongue,
were surprised at my speedy progress.

And indeed I thought first that any number of words might be easily
learned, because they were but combinations of letters in one way or
other, which are limited to only twenty-six. But it did not take me
long to change this view. As the length of the daily lesson increased
I came to wonder more and more whether the English words were not
charmed after all. They were as slippery as eels, and, indeed, written
like eels too. I thought time and again that I had them secure in my
mental box, but when I opened the lid the next day, they vanished like
a spirit. Something must be done, I thought, to tie them down, and so
I invented a certain scheme. It was that when I looked up a new word
in my Anglo-Japanese dictionary, I put a black mark beside it to show
that on that very moment it passed into my possession. The plan seemed
to work very well, but before long I found I had to mark the same words
three or four times, till my dictionary looked very much as if it were
suffering from spotted fever!

Then came grammar. Grammar is the least familiar part of language
study. We are never taught in that in learning vernacular Japanese.
Somehow words come out of our mouths naturally and arrange themselves
into smooth sentences. So when I had to commit to memory the
definitions of the noun, verb, adjective, and so forth, and to
classify English words into them, I came to doubt if I were not
studying botany instead of language. Fortunately I did not make such
a mistake as, “A verb is something to eat,” or “Every sentence and
the name of God must begin with a caterpillar.” But it took me months
to understand the difference between the transitive and intransitive
verbs. I finally struck an original definition of them. It is this,
that a verb is called transitive when it is ambitious and intransitive
when it is not, because in the former case it takes an object and in
the latter it does not. I wondered why some one among the learned
teachers did not tell me that right away in the beginning. It would
have saved me a lot of trouble. Again in parsing, any word parading
with a capital was a relief to me: I had no hesitation in giving it as
a proper noun, whether it appeared in the main body of a piece or--in
the title!

Now there is one little part of speech which puzzled me a great deal.
It is the article. In translation I had the great satisfaction of
passing it over entirely, as we have no equivalent to it in Japanese,
but in composition it was the first thing that puzzled and annoyed
me. The Japanese formerly went out bareheaded, and their language
is also free from this encumbrance of a head-gear--for the article
is a head-gear to a noun--and I was liable to drop off the article
entirely, or, if I tried, to use a wrong one every time. Surely this
hat etiquette was difficult and capricious, too. I thought I could
master its secret if I knew thoroughly when and what sort of a bonnet
a girl should wear--of course including the case of wearing a derby
on horseback! This occurred to me a long time afterward in America,
however.

[Illustration: A JAPANESE SCHOOL OF THE PRESENT DAY.]

Let me mention another difficulty. This was the pronunciation. A number
of new sounds were introduced, the most conspicuous of which are those
in which th, l, f, and v are found. The th-sound was bad enough,
but l was next to impossible. Finding this to be the case, an American
teacher would draw a cross-section of a face on the blackboard, only
with a scant outline of the mouth and nose (once he drew the head,
too, but it caused an unusual amount of merriment among the boys,
as it was as bald as his, and he never finished the picture again),
and explain the position of the tongue in uttering the sound, which
we industriously copied. And he also would have us say, “Rollo rode
Lorillard,” instead of “Present,” or “Here,” when the roll was called.
But the semi-historical passage fell from the boys’ lips rumbling like
a thunder:

“Rorro rode Rorirrard!”

One year passed happily in the new school, when it moved to its new
buildings on the other side of the city, about five miles away. It was
at first a short walk from my house, but when it increased from two
minutes to two hours, with no convenience of street-cars to help my
feeble feet, I naturally hesitated to go. I had to walk if I continued
to attend, as boarding out in the dormitory was too expensive for our
means. The school, however, was too good to be given up at that time,
and so I made up my mind not to discontinue it.

To cover ten miles a day, spending four to five hours, was not a light
task for a boy of thirteen. It was all I could do on fine days. In
stormy weather the feat would become a struggle, and I was more than
glad to accept the kind offer of one of my schoolmates to break the
trip at his home for the night.

I had to start early to be on time at the eight o’clock exercise. Five
o’clock was the time for me to get up, but my mother rose at least at
half-past four to make me a hot breakfast of boiled rice and bean soup.

My mother was the sort of woman who expresses herself in work rather
than in words. And in this she was regularity itself. One thing which
impressed me in this more than anything else was her management of my
dresses. Japanese decency requires eight suits a year for any one just
for ordinary use, and of course I needed, or rather my mother believed
that I needed that: eight suits--four in summer, two in winter, and one
each in spring and in autumn. The dresses were not always made from new
pieces, and so gave much more trouble. She made over the old clothes,
washed and turned or dyed, if necessary, before doing so. My notion of
her regularity, however, must be augmented five times, as she was doing
the same thing--though I did not notice it at the time--with the other
members of the family.

And so this early rising on her part for my sake went like clockwork
morning after morning. If this means steadiness of her devotion to her
son and to all related dearly to her, she had it.

Again she was not wordy in any case. I never had a long lecture from
her, though, I am sorry to say, I had some short ones. On the contrary,
she had the secret of speaking in silence. There was some magic power
in her touch. I love to look back to my childhood, when she used to
dress me in the morning, at the end of which she would whisper in my
ear just a word: “Be good all the day, dear child.” It was simply
pleasure.

So at this hour when the world was still asleep, as I sat without
a word at a short morning repast before her, with the lamp shining
and every manifestation of motherly love around me, I was under an
unspeakable spell, and learned to love her most.

I had to start soon, however. I descended to the door and opened it. It
was still dark and the sky was starry. There was something that held me
back for a moment. But I took heart and went out. Mother wanted to go
with me for some distance. Naturally, I declined the offer, wishing
not to seem cowardly, but also because I did not want to give her such
a trouble. So she just stood at the door with a lantern and saw me off
till I turned the corner.

I thought she turned and stepped inside after that, as I heard the
noise of the sliding door being shut, and, being satisfied, I hurried
on my way. But one morning something happened that revealed the truth.
There was a bridge at the second turning, two blocks away from my
house, and from that a long street ran. I was away some distance on
this road when one of the fastenings of my clog-straps broke off. It is
sad when this occurs. We cannot walk at all. We should be provided with
material for repair, but it seldom happens that we are. To return was
to lose time, and I must be going. So I did what boys usually do under
such a circumstances. I hunted a wedge-shaped pebble, and, holding
the broken end of the fastening in the hole, where it had been kept
tight, drove it with another piece of stone. I was able to walk a short
distance, but again it broke off. I was irritated, but there was no use
in fussing: so I again went patiently to repair. I was hammering the
clog with a stone when I heard the noise of hurried steps approaching.
I was too busy to look back, but a voice came which made me drop the
stone.

“Sakae!”

I turned, and there my mother stood with a strip of cloth ready to help
me! I was surprised, but was too glad for help to ask any question.

As I trod on, I reasoned to account for her appearance in this way:
that after seeing me turn the corner, my mother was wont to put out
the light, shut the door, and follow me to the bridge, and from there
was watching to see that I was safe. She saw that day that I was in
trouble, and divined the whole case by the knocks I gave at the clog.
So she was there with her help. As I thought of that, a silent tear
trickled down my cheek.




CHAPTER X

A BOY ASTRONOMER

    What I Intended to Be--My Aunt’s View--My Parents’ Approval--My
    Uncle’s Enthusiasm--The Total Eclipse of the Sun.


Like all ambitious boys, I now began to dream of my future.

In a daily paper to which we were subscribing, there was a story
appearing in serial form, which I happened to read, and in which I
became immediately interested. It was a scientific novel, with a
revenge motive. The title, the author, the plot--all are now forgotten
except the vague idea that the hero in the end, by his high inventive
ability, built a wonderful machine, by means of which he poured
poisonous gas into the castle where his enemy lived, and thereby took
his vengeance upon him. I was simply fascinated, and wanted to be an
engineer.

The first one to whom I confided my intention was Tomo-chan. Of course
I did not and could not depict an engineer as the one in the story,
wrapped in the glowing splendor of his intellectual triumph. I might
have tried it if she had given me a chance to do so. But too soon her
peculiar and perhaps truer view of the profession came on me like a
blow.

“Why, isn’t an engineer a sort of carpenter?” she asked. Reduced to
such a lowest term, even my hero looked shabby, and from that very
moment I dropped him entirely.

I was not, however, fortunate enough to find a substitute worthy of my
admiration, and I had to go without any. But this time my mind seemed
to be able to present to me a proper object of my ambition. All my
thought gradually drifted toward the province of science (I little
knew then that it was the same engineer story which influenced me).
Of all branches of learning, science appeared to me to be the most
substantial, most worthy of serious study, and most certain of arriving
at the secret of the creation. The study, however, of a small portion
of God’s work, such as a leaf of a tree or a nameless insect, did not
appeal to me. No, any section of the earth was not large enough to lay
down my life for. I wanted to take in the earth, the sun, the moon,
the planets, and the stars--in fact, all the universe at once! So I
fixed upon astronomy as my special study. The immensity of the field
and the purely theoretical nature of the subject, coupled with the
transcendency of the pursuit over the triviality of worldly affairs,
had all its charm over me. It was simply great.

I went again to Tomo-chan to tell her of my intention. The idea of an
astronomer was apparently beyond her grasp. She could not think of any
occupation such as carpenter, mason, and so forth, to associate with
an astronomer, and it did not take her long to admit that it was grand.

This was my first triumph, and now I approached my aunt to see what
she would think of it. She was one of those women whose mind never
soared above the world even for the sake of observation. She could
not conceive the idea that this earth--which, by the way, was flat,
according to her view--revolves every day. I went into a whole length
of explanation by the help of a lighted lamp and my fist, to show how
the revolution would cause day and night, but to no purpose. So I
changed my tactics and told her the story of a little girl, who, in
her own way, understood this fact. She lived at the foot of a high
mountain, on the summit of which there was a lake. The little girl
could not understand how water could be found in such a high place till
she was told one day about the diurnal revolution of the earth. “That
must be true,” she said, “and so the mountain dips into the sea in the
night and carries the water from there!”

But it was not my purpose to convince her about such a matter, and so I
proceeded to acquaint her with my intention. I soon found that it was
not exactly in the line of her approval. She presented to me at once
her worldly view of the profession, how out of ordinary my choice was.
The astronomer was to her a man who sleeps when all should be up, and
is awake when all should be in bed. He looks always at the sky, and
does not know often that he is about to tumble into a ditch. He has to
perch on a roof or a tree-top like a sparrow, to watch the stars while
everybody is enjoying some nice thing in the house.

This, however, had no effect of a wet blanket upon me. I knew that she
was teasing me for the mere fun of it. Her humorous eyes were ready
to take in any change in my surprised countenance, which on my part I
partly assumed to please her.

In the end, however, she frankly admitted that the constantly
increasing number of new studies in these enlightened days bewildered
her greatly, and she could not tell which profession was sure to lead
one to success. Perhaps I was right, she said, in choosing a study
which only a few might attempt.

Two days passed, in the course of which I became surer of my choice and
was ready to face my parents. I had a secret suspicion that my father
might have some plan already laid out for me. If he had had anything in
mind outside of a scientific pursuit, I should have been non-plussed.
But, luckily, I found I was ahead of him; indeed, he and my mother,
too, seemed to trust everything to my natural inclination, and had only
a vague but bright future for me without any particular road leading to
it. So, when I laid before them, side by side, my desire or rather my
determination to become an astronomer and a future college professor,
with an income four times as great as my father’s,--I reserved the
poetic side of my choice for my own meditation,--I made such a deep
impression on them that it surprised me altogether. My mother, bending
over her sewing by lamp-light, silently passed her hand over her eyes,
while my father picked up a paper which had been read all through,
with a slightly drawn “Um,” in his throat, which in his case was to
be interpreted as indicating some pleasant feeling. My mother was
the spokesman in such a case when my father’s silence was meant for
consent. She told me that one must go heart and soul into any sort of
study in order to excel in it. I simply nodded, and presently went to
bed with a light heart, after bidding good night to the dear little
stars who would be my constant companions hereafter.

I could not meet my uncle till Sunday, but Tomo-chan told me that he
heard everything about me from my aunt, and was very enthusiastic over
my intention. Indeed, he was always enthusiastic over new things,
though his enthusiasm was usually rather short-lived. But I was glad
that my news struck him in that light. That morning I found him
reading a paper, but as I approached he looked up, and, removing his
spectacles, and combing his beard with his fingers, surveyed me awhile
as if to see if I was capable of my word. But really he was waiting for
the return of his enthusiastic mood. I felt that Tomo-chan was smiling
over my situation from the next room, though I could not remove my eyes
from my uncle.

“Astronomer, eh?” he said at last.

“Yes, sir. Going to be one.”

“That’s grand. You will be the fourth or fifth in that line in our
country. I should take one of those new studies if I were young enough.
But astronomy is indeed fascinating. Do you know that the moon never
shows her other side?”

Here he rose up and began to pace the room. His enthusiasm served to
bring back a flood of the shallow but ready knowledge which he stored
up in a corner of his head. And he did not let me speak a word till he
had finished a lecture on the solar system.

“Look here,”--he turned to me with the look of a man who made a sudden
discovery,--“do you know of the solar eclipse we are going to have on
the 20th?”

Of course I did. It was still two weeks thence, and the moon was as
opposite as could be, but I had already darkened a piece of glass over
a candle and begun to observe the sun at least once a day.

“This is the total eclipse and its rare opportunity. You may not see it
again in Japan in your lifetime,” he went on.

In my lifetime was too strong a phrase, but I was very sorry to miss
the chance, as the zone of the total eclipse passed some fifty miles
north of Tokyo, and I had--no money.

“Perhaps in your lifetime, too,” I ventured to suggest.

“Yes, indeed. I did not think of myself,” he laughingly said. “Well,
then, let’s go!”

“Go?”

“I will take you and Tomo with me.”

In the adjoining room Tomo-chan was seen just raising both her
outstretched hands, opening her mouth, and rolling her eyes--all
bespeaking her joy and surprise. I wished very much to answer the
signal but for the presence of my uncle, who kept staring at anybody or
anything near him, and this time at me, while revolving some new plan
in his mind.

For the intervening days I was busy making preparations for the
expedition. I had to buy half a dozen pieces of glass, frame and
darken them in a variety of shade; to adjust my watch to keep time; to
study the constellation where the sun was, and note the stars of the
first magnitude visible on the day; and to make four or five copies
of a drawing with a graduated circle in the centre for the sun, and
two other concentric circles for the orbits of Mercury and Venus. The
difficult part of the business was how to record time for the beginning
of the eclipse. We needed two, at least, for this. Tomo-chan was glad
to offer her service, but she did not want to look at the watch but
at the sun. Well, I had no objection to that, as long as she could
tell the right moment. But as I was a little in doubt on that point,
we spent several nights in drill by means of a shaded lamp which cast
a bright disc on the wall. No sooner than I moved an opaque one and
touched the other, she had to press my hand. But too often the movable
disc was a quarter of an inch inside the other when the belated touch
passed on to me. So I had to train her eyes first by giving a signal at
the time of contact by means of a pinch. And if she did not perceive it
still, she got pinched still harder. She was very unteachable in this
respect, but still wanted to look at the sun rather than the watch!

So the day of the eclipse arrived. It was a hot, clear day in July,
and most fitted for the observation. We took an early train, as we
had a long way to go, and then we must settle somewhere to watch the
beginning and the end and the most precious middle. In the central part
of the zone of the total eclipse there was a government observatory
temporarily erected, and we wanted to get as near to it as possible.
But we did not take into account the rather slow service of the train,
and the hour for the eclipse had come before we got into the zone, and
were, of course, in the train. As nothing could be done under such
circumstances, we gave up the initial observation, and all the three
just looked at the sun through the soot-covered pieces of glass. We
did not know that we were a gainer and not a loser by this till late,
except Tomo-chan, who had already earned enough pinches merely to be
ready for the occasion.

The train was a few miles within the zone when my uncle thought it
wise to stop at a small village and make an observation there, as the
sun was fast being overshadowed. We settled in a nice tea-house, whose
front room in the second floor with an open veranda was just the sort
of place for our purpose. And there, after a quick lunch, we awaited
the hour. Tomo-chan and I had a board and a sheet of paper which I had
specially prepared, to note the location of the visible stars and to
draw the shape of the corona.

I never knew that the light of the sun was so strong, for till the
luminous surface was reduced to a very thin crescent, no change was
observed in the sky. But all at once, as the shadow of a man passing
on the street became weirdly faint, the color of the sky turned into
warm steel-black and the purple stars began to shine! And in no time
the crescent was changed into a mere speck of silver light, and in a
second, as it burned itself off, a beautifully soft fringe of twilight
appeared. That was the corona!

I now assiduously set about to take down the exact shape of it. There
were only thirty seconds of this precious moment. So I just put down
important points on the paper, noting carefully the position and the
distance, and tried to take a clear impression in my mind to be traced
out later. Tomo-chan was working, too. But her process was just the
opposite of mine. Evidently she wished to follow my picture, but as
mine was no picture, she turned to the sun with a sigh, and, though she
finished it in time, she had a picture of a heavenly corona twisted
considerably by an earthly wind!

The wonderful moment had now passed, and the corona, with a tail
trailing at the right-hand side of the sun, disappeared like a dream.
It was too brief, but we were satisfied, and did not know what to
think of our good fortune when, three minutes later, a dark cloud came
and brushed the sun off. Then we imagined what the consequence might
have been if the train had been fast and we had gone on further north.
The next day’s paper said that the government expedition was entirely
spoiled on account of the untimely shower!




CHAPTER XI

IN THE SUBURBS

    A Novel Experiment--Removal--Our New House--Angling--Tomo-chan’s
    Visit.


We were now to remove to the suburbs. Father got a better position with
a firm quite far from our house, and it was thought expedient for us to
do so for his convenience.

There was one thing which made me dislike this change. And it was
about Tomo-chan. We should be separated, and might not see each other
so often; all the more so as we had grown to be quite intimate and
congenial by this time and had great fun in indulging in some novel
experiment now and then. This last was by no means of a scientific
nature. Still we went at it with something of scientific spirit to see
whether a certain innovation was applicable or not.

Here is one such experiment we tried. Tomo-chan heard from one of
her friends, whose sister recently came home from America, that in
that enlightened country when a lady and a gentleman take a walk
together, the latter offers his arm to the former, who, of course,
never hesitates to take it. Tomo-chan thought it was a fine idea, and
asked me if we might try it. Well, I had no objection if it were only
dark enough to make the trial. So one evening, under the shade of
cherry-trees, we hooked our arms. Our cumbersome sleeves were somewhat
in the way, but still we got on famously. After that, whenever we were
in the dark, a hint would come from Tomo-chan to walk in that fashion,
and I was only glad to accept it. Curiously enough it was the girl who
suggested it every time!

Of course we were not uniformly successful. I well remember the evening
of that memorable day of the total eclipse. My uncle’s enthusiasm
greatly abated as the event of the day passed, and as we alighted from
the train and stood before a fruit-vender’s stall, he now appeared
to be much interested in a large watermelon. Unable to resist the
temptation, he bought one and had me carry it. So I held it under my
arm and walked on. The street was not crowded and the night was dark,
and I went on behind my uncle with Tomo-chan beside me, when a touch
was felt at my unoccupied arm. It was the well-known hint, and in no
time Tomo-chan and the watermelon were hanging from my arms. It was
not an easy thing to walk in that way, especially behind the back of
my uncle, who might turn round to see us at any moment. Then I found
that even a watermelon had a bit of jealousy in it, for every minute
it would get heavier and more unmanageable as my mind inclined more
and more to my fair companion. The point was soon reached when it was
no longer endurable for the watermelon, and at my unguarded moment
it jumped out of my arm to commit suicide. The bounce at once made
my uncle turn and wring his hands for anger at my carelessness. I
was equal to the occasion, however. Quickly extricating myself from
Tomo-chan, I pounced at the sulky thing before a word was spoken, and
saved it from any harm. So we went on as before. Only both my arms were
now taken by the watermelon, and poor Tomo-chan dragged on crestfallen.

But such fun we could no longer have now that we were to be separated
for a time at least, and we parted with heavy heart.

The removal was a curious affair. On five or six carts, everything in
the house from paper screens to a kitchen stove was piled up. There
was an old pomegranate-tree in the back yard which we had brought from
the country some six or seven years ago. And of course we dug it up
carefully and loaded it on the cart. Also we did not forget to pull
down long poles for drying purpose and add them to the heap, together
with two or three round stones for pressing pickles. The train of the
carts pulled by coolies then moved slowly on through the city, and it
was after dark before we could unload them at the destination.

The new house was in a charming spot. Just back of us was a low hill
thickly wooded with tall oaks and criptomerias; to the left across
a brook stretched a tilled field, fringed in the far distance with
bamboo bushes and elm groves; to the right and on the hill the eye
could command the western horizon where Fujiyama hung low like an azure
fan against the golden sky. The birds sang, the flowers bloomed, the
fire-worms glowed, and I never felt a change so delightful, coming as I
did from a town where boys believed that Indian corn either grew on a
tree, or sprang, like bamboo shoots, from the ground without planting.

My school came to be much nearer; the potted trees of my father
increased; a baby was added to our family; and, as the sun and the moon
moved on peacefully, we were all well contented with our lot.

There was not much to be recorded for our purpose in those days
except the angling my father and I had occasionally in a river. His
was always a calm turn of mind, and the soothing, restful pastime of
fishing suited him immensely. I love to picture him sitting under the
sheltering pine-tree by a quiet river bank, and handling the rod and
line, while quaint ripples of smiles came and went across his face as
the nibbling fish gave his line a tantalizing pull. Once, when it was
the season of smelt in the month of May, we went over to a stream about
two miles off. The scene around there was lovely. The mass of fresh
leaves covered the open field, and along the slope of the bank, with
stunted willows here and there, myriads of dandelions like golden stars
studded the green. And the breeze was fanning leisurely the warmth of
the May sun. The stream was shallow, and was singing and foaming on the
pebbly bed.

“Let’s see what we can do about here,” said my father, as he selected
a spot where the water was going on in a cataract. And we cast our
flies and tried our luck. But, after awhile, having no success, I began
to doubt if my father had chosen the right spot, and so I thought
that I had better follow up the river and see if they bit. I left my
father to his fortune and started on my adventure. I did not know that
smelt-fishing was such a dull business, for, wherever I went, there was
the foaming pool, the steady flow, and there were practically no bites.
Yes, there was one, but I only fished a piece of some rotten wood or
dripping moss! I wondered what my father was doing, and, not without a
smile over his probable ill-luck, I went back, when I found him still
standing in the same spot. I doubted if he was not going to take root
there. I at once inquired about his success. “No, nothing remarkable,”
he gently replied, dreaming on the sparkling water. I went to his
basket dipped in the river, and lifted the lid, when a large prisoner,
disturbed by the jar I gave, snapped violently! After all, I thought,
he was of a piece with Izaak Walton.

So days passed, and more than a year rolled on since our removal. It
was now the latter part of October, when one day we had unexpected
visitors. They were my aunt and Tomo-chan. This was not their first
visit since we came here, but I had always been out and had had no
chance to meet them. Still, they did not come very often, and so my
aunt, with many bows, apologized for her negligence to call, while
my mother, with equal courtesy, was not behind the guest in heaping
up apologies for neglect on her part. Then, as tea and cakes were
produced, inquiry after the health and condition of each member of the
family issued from both sides, and was answered modestly, followed
by amiable comment from the inquirers. Then, with equal lightness of
heart, the season was talked over, the recent events, and, indeed,
anything of timely interest.

While such a talk was going on my eyes were secretly on Tomo-chan. I
was surprised at her change. I left her a mere child only a year and
a half ago, but the bud of yesterday was the flower of to-day. With a
snowy neck and rosy cheeks, her ebony hair done up stylishly, she sat
in striped silk of light azure and dove-gray. She no longer looked
at me straight, but, except for furtive glances, her eyes sought her
jewelled hands, idly occupied in clasping and unclasping on her knees.
A glow of bashfulness was beaming from her as most eyes sought their
focus in her.

As the talk was about to become more personal, my mother suggested
that Tomo-chan might go out with me as a guide to look around the
place, which was beautiful at that time. My aunt seconded the motion,
and asked me to take the trouble of doing so. So there was no need of
hesitation, and in the next moment we were out for a walk on a country
road.

At first we were speechless. She appeared to me no longer approachable
with the familiarity of “Tomo-chan.” But as the autumnal breeze cooled
down her bashfulness, and the beauty of the scenery was absorbing her
attention more and more, I ventured to falter:

“Tomo-chan!”

“Yes?”

She looked at me with her eyes beaming with laughter, and there was the
same old innocent childhood, but where was the bashfulness?

“Do you find this beautiful?” I asked.

“Yes, certainly.”

“It wasn’t so beautiful yesterday.”

“You mean to say that you had a sudden frost last night that tinged the
leaves?” she archly asked.

“Why, more sudden than that; it got to be lovelier this very afternoon.
We’ve had something better than a frost.”

“How is it possible?” She laughed.

“No stranger than that you are changed so _beautifully_ in a year.”

I said what I should not have said, for she blushed to the roots of her
hair, and I repented of my forwardness.

“But come along, Tomo-chan. I’ll show you what you have not seen yet.”

And I took her over the hill and pointed to the faint shadow of the
peerless mountain.

“Why, Fujiyama!” she exclaimed. “Oh, how lovely! Could you see that
every day from here?”

“Not in rainy weather.... But she wanted to see you to-day, as
everybody else did, and waited there from morning.”

“I wish you would thank her for that, Sakae-san.”

“You ought first to thank him who told her about your coming.”

“Oh,” she smilingly said, “but don’t tell me his name now, as I want to
repay him afterwards--abundantly.”

I touched her dimple as she said so, and then we went to the secluded
part of the hill where the crimson branches of maples were projecting
from the green background, the red frosted “crows’ melons” festooned
high on the criptomerias, and the wild chrysanthemums were blooming
lavishly. In such a charming spot Tomo-chan was a child of thirteen,
and wanted me to take “crows’ melons”--I wonder if she remembered the
watermelon incident?--and to gather chrysanthemums, and laughed and
sang to her heart’s content. She was her old very self. As the setting
sun was resting on her shoulder, I decked her hair with wild flowers,
and whispered in her ear that she would remember evermore the day we
spent together. She nodded, and smiled the sweetest of smiles.


THE END.




  BOOKS
  FOR
  Young Americans.

  By ELBRIDGE S. BROOKS.

_THE POPULAR “TRUE STORY” SERIES._

    Seven 4to volumes of from 200 to 250 pages each, profusely
    illustrated and attractively bound in cloth, each $1.50.

    “A series which is worthy of hearty commendation. Every grown-up
    person who has read one of them will wish to buy the whole series
    for the young folks at home.”--_The Christian Advocate._

This series contains:

    THE TRUE STORY OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, called the Admiral.
                                                      _Revised Edition._

    THE TRUE STORY OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, called the Father of His
    Country.

    THE TRUE STORY OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN, the American.

    THE TRUE STORY OF U. S. GRANT, the American Soldier.

    THE TRUE STORY OF BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, the American Statesman.

    THE TRUE STORY OF LAFAYETTE, the Friend of America.

    THE TRUE STORY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. From 1492 to 1900.

Also, recently published:

    IN BLUE AND WHITE. A Story of the American Revolution. 8vo,
    illustrated, $1.50.


  Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Co.,
  93 FEDERAL STREET        BOSTON.




  American Heroes and Heroines

[Illustration]

  By PAULINE CARRINGTON BOUVÉ Illustrated 12mo Cloth $1.25

This book, which will tend directly toward the making of patriotism
in young Americans, contains some twenty brief, clever and attractive
sketches of famous men and women in American history, among them Father
Marquette, Anne Hutchinson, Israel Putnam, Molly Pitcher, Paul Jones,
Dolly Madison, Daniel Boone, etc. Mrs. Bouvé is well known as a writer
both of fiction and history, and her work in this case is admirable.

    “The style of the book for simplicity and clearness of expression
    could hardly be excelled.”--_Boston Budget._


  The Scarlet Patch
  The Story of a Patriot Boy in the Mohawk Valley

  By MARY E. Q. BRUSH Illustrated by GEORGE W. PICKNELL $1.25

“The Scarlet Patch” was the badge of a Tory organization, and a
loyal patriot boy, Donald Bastien, is dismayed at learning that his
uncle, with whom he is a “bound boy,” is secretly connected with this
treacherous band. Thrilling scenes follow in which a faithful Indian
figures prominently, and there is a vivid presentation of the school
and home life as well as the public affairs of those times.

    “A book that will be most valuable to the library of the young
    boy.”--_Providence News._


  Stories of Brave Old Times

  Some Pen Pictures of Scenes Which
  Took Place Previous to, or Connected
  With, the American Revolution

  By HELEN M. CLEVELAND Profusely illustrated Large 12mo Cloth $1.25

[Illustration]

It is a book for every library, a book for adults, and a book for the
young. Perhaps no other book yet written sets the great cost of freedom
so clearly before the young, consequently is such a spur to patriotism.

    “It can unqualifiedly be commended as a book for youthful readers;
    its great wealth of illustrations adding to its value.”--_Chicago
    News._


[Illustration]

  Famous Children

  By H. TWITCHELL Illustrated $1.25

We have here a most valuable book, telling not of the childhood of
those who have afterwards become famous, but those who as children
are famous in history, song, and story. For convenience the subjects
are grouped as “Royal Children,” “Child Artists,” “Learned Children,”
“Devoted Children,” “Child Martyrs,” and “Heroic Children,” and the
names of the “two little princes,” Louis XVII., Mozart, St. Genevieve,
David, and Joan of Arc are here, as well as those of many more.

  The Story of the Cid
  For Young
  People

  By CALVIN DILL WILSON Illustrated by J. W. KENNEDY $1.25

Mr. Wilson, a well-known writer and reviewer, has prepared from
Southey’s translation, which was far too cumbrous to entertain the
young, a book that will kindle the imagination of youth and entertain
and inform those of advanced years.


[Illustration]

  Jason’s Quest

  By D. O. S. LOWELL, A. M., M. D. Master in Roxbury Latin School
  Illustrated $1.00

Nothing can be better to arouse the imagination of boys and girls, and
at the same time store in their minds knowledge indispensable to any
one who would be known as cultured, or happier than Professor Lowell’s
way of telling a story, and the many excellent drawings have lent great
spirit to the narrative.


  Heroes of the Crusades

  By AMANDA M. DOUGLAS Cloth Fifty full-page illustrations $1.50

The romantic interest in the days of chivalry, so fully exemplified by
the “Heroes of the Crusades,” is permanent and properly so. This book
is fitted to keep it alive without descending to improbability or cheap
sensationalism.


[Illustration]

  A Boy of a Thousand Years Ago

  By HARRIET T. COMSTOCK Large 12mo Profusely illustrated with
  full-page drawings and chapter headings by GEORGE VARIAN $1.00

It will at once be understood that the “boy” of the story is Alfred the
Great in his youth, but it cannot be understood how delightful a story
this is until it is seen and read. The splendid pictures of George
Varian make this book superior among juveniles.

    “Not a boy lives who will not enjoy this book thoroughly. There
    is a good deal of first-class historical information woven into
    the story, but the best part of it is the splendid impression
    of times and manners it gives in old England a thousand years
    ago.”--_Louisville Courier-Journal._

    “Mrs. Comstock writes very appreciatively of Little Alfred, who was
    afterward the Great, and from mighty meagre materials creates a
    story that hangs together well. The illustrations for this volume
    are especially beautiful.”--_Boston Home Journal._


[Illustration]

  The Story of Joan of Arc
  FOR
  BOYS AND GIRLS

  By KATE E. CARPENTER Illustrated by AMY BROOKS, also from
  paintings, and with map Large 12mo Cloth $1.00

The favorite story of Joan of Arc is here treated in a uniquely
attractive way. “Aunt Kate” tells the story of Joan of Arc to Master
Harold, aged 11, and to Misses Bessie and Marjorie, aged 10 and 8,
respectively, to their intense delight. They look up places on the
map, and have a fine time while hearing the thrilling story, told in
such simple language that they can readily understand it all. Parents
and teachers will also be greatly interested in this book from an
educational point of view.

    “The tale is well told and the children will delight in
    it.”--_Chicago Post._

    “Told so simply and clearly that young readers cannot fail to be
    entertained and instructed.”--_Congregationalist, Boston._


For sale by all booksellers or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publishers,

LOTHROP, LEE & SHEPARD CO., BOSTON




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Archaic spelling that may have been in use at the time of publication
  has been preserved.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.





End of Project Gutenberg's When I Was a Boy in Japan, by Sakae Shioya

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHEN I WAS A BOY IN JAPAN ***

***** This file should be named 55939-0.txt or 55939-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/9/3/55939/

Produced by MFR, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Municipal and Sanitary Engineer's
Handbook, by H. Percy Boulnois

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Municipal and Sanitary Engineer's Handbook

Author: H. Percy Boulnois

Release Date: November 11, 2017 [EBook #55935]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MUNICIPAL AND SANITARY ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Harry Lamé and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







  Text between _underscores_ represent texts printed in italics; text
  between ~tildes~ represents text printed in a sans-serif font (to
  indicate shape rather than letter).

  More Transcriber’s Notes may be found at the end of this text.




  THE
  MUNICIPAL AND SANITARY
  ENGINEER’S HANDBOOK.




  THE
  MUNICIPAL AND SANITARY
  ENGINEER’S HANDBOOK.

  BY

  H. PERCY BOULNOIS, M. INST. C.E.,
  M. SAN. INST. GT. BRITAIN;

  BOROUGH ENGINEER, PORTSMOUTH; LATE CITY SURVEYOR, EXETER;
  AUTHOR OF “DIRTY DUST-BINS AND SLOPPY STREETS,” “ANNIHILATION OF SEWER
  GASES,” ETC.

  “_SALUS POPULI SUPREMA LEX._”

  [Illustration]

  LONDON:
  E. & F. N. SPON, 16, CHARING CROSS.

  NEW YORK:
  35, MURRAY STREET.

  1883.




PREFACE.


In carrying out the many duties devolving upon a Borough Surveyor, it
has so often been my wish to turn to a practical book of reference upon
the many subjects connected with these duties, that I have written the
following pages; and I trust that they will form a useful Handbook.

  H. PERCY BOULNOIS.

  PORTSMOUTH,
  _May, 1883_.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER I.
  THE TOWN SURVEYOR.

  Office of surveyor first legalised -- Clause of Public Health Act
  1875, making appointment -- Division of England into districts --
  Surveyor to Rural Authority -- Clauses of Act referring to surveyor --
  Title of “Surveyor” is an erroneous one -- List of subjects on which
  he has often to advise -- Want of Government protection for surveyor
  -- Mr. Lewis Angell on protection -- Reasons for Government refusal --
  Time will effect a change                                       page 1

  CHAPTER II.
  THE APPOINTMENT OF SURVEYOR.

  Sub-committee to fix salary and duties -- Specimen report and list of
  duties -- Test of merit necessary -- Examination by Sanitary Institute
  of Great Britain -- Particulars of these examinations -- Syllabus of
  subjects -- Specimens of examination papers -- Authoritative
  examination, however, still necessary -- Methods to be adopted to
  obtain appointment of surveyor -- Canvassing                        10

  CHAPTER III.
  THE SURVEYOR’S DUTIES.

  Public Health Act and surveyors of highways -- List of duties
  devolving upon surveyor in consequence -- Meetings of boards and
  committees -- List of suitable names for committees -- Punctuality --
  Reports -- Methodical habits                                        20

  CHAPTER IV.
  TRAFFIC.

  Interests involved in construction and maintenance of streets --
  Requirements of a good roadway -- Wearing effect of traffic -- Mr.
  Deacon’s standard -- Effect of horses’ hoofs on roadways -- Remarks on
  shoeing -- Traction on roads -- Tables of resistance -- Forces tending
  to destroy momentum -- Table of tractive force, etc. -- Another table
  giving inclinations -- Proper gradients of roadways -- Table of
  resistance by Crompton -- Wheel resistance -- Mr. Haywood and safety
  of traffic -- Stopping and starting vehicles -- Safe width of roadways
  -- Vehicles and pedestrians passing each other -- Sanctuaries --
  Danger of crossings                                                 25

  CHAPTER V.
  MACADAMISED ROADWAYS.

  Laying out new roads -- Macadamised roads a luxury -- Telford and
  Macadam -- Specification of roadway, fifty years ago -- Modern
  specification of roadway -- Advantages of Telford’s system -- Hard
  core -- Concrete -- Table of depths of materials -- Ellice Clarke’s
  tables of comparative cost -- Further particulars of comparative cost
  -- Streets of Paris -- Cross section of roadway -- Objections to
  macadamised roadways -- Notes on maintenance -- Bituminous roadways 34

  CHAPTER VI.
  ROAD METAL AND BREAKING.

  Test of fitness of stone -- Primary investigations -- Qualities
  necessary -- List of stones used as road metal -- Variety of materials
  used -- Table of comparative efficiency of road metal in France --
  Hand-broken stone -- Gauging the size -- Quantity broken per diem --
  Machines for breaking stones -- Price of machines -- Work effected by
  machinery -- Precautions necessary -- Objections to machinery --
  Weight of broken stone -- Specification for supply of road metal    48

  CHAPTER VII.
  ROAD ROLLING.

  First introduction of rollers -- Mr. Parry on steam rolling -- Cost
  for repairs -- Number of men necessary -- Fuel used -- Other uses for
  engine power -- Spikes for chequering -- Binding material -- Gradients
  -- Work effected -- Description of manner in which roller should be
  applied -- Method adopted in the United States -- Use of roller for
  repairs of roads -- Method adopted at Gloucester -- Effect of weight
  of roller on roads -- Advantages of steam rolling -- Mr. Paget on
  rolling -- Disadvantages of steam rolling -- Horse rollers          60

  CHAPTER VIII.
  PITCHED PAVEMENTS.

  Economy under heavy traffic -- Noise and slipperiness -- Improvements
  effected -- Size of setts -- Description of best class of stones --
  Mr. Walker and wear of stones -- The Euston pavement -- The Guidet
  paving -- Manchester pavement -- Concrete foundations -- Grouting --
  Bituminous mixture -- Stone tram-tracks                             73

  CHAPTER IX.
  WOOD PAVING.

  First introduced into metropolis -- Improvements since -- List and
  description of many various modern methods -- Sanitary objections to
  wood pavement -- Power of absorption of wood -- Preserving processes
  -- Wear of wood paving -- Different estimates of life -- Woods
  employed -- Advantages of this description of paving -- Objections to
  it -- Cost of wood pavement -- Tables of cost and life --
  Specification of wood pavement                                      81

  CHAPTER X.
  COMPRESSED ASPHALTE ROADWAYS.

  Description of asphalte -- Mr. Deland’s test -- Percentage of bitumen
  necessary -- Method of construction of compressed asphalte roadway --
  Advantages of this description of pavement -- Objections to it on
  account of slipperiness -- Gradient -- Cost of asphalte pavement --
  Tables on the subject -- Specifications for a compressed asphalte
  roadway -- Other descriptions of asphalte roadways -- Hints on the
  success or the reverse of asphalte roadways                         96

  CHAPTER XI.
  FOOTPATHS.

  Foundation -- List of materials for footpaths -- Mastic asphalte --
  Description of manner of laying -- Proportions of asphalte, bitumen,
  and grit -- Yorkshire flagging -- Specification for York flagging --
  Caithness flagging -- Its advantages -- Blue lias flagging -- Concrete
  footpaths -- Description of American concrete path -- Artificial stone
  pavements -- Brick footpaths -- Granite slabs -- Artificial asphalte
  paths -- Specification of tar pavement -- American tar pavement --
  Gravel footpaths -- Sections of paths -- Tarred paths              106

  CHAPTER XII.
  KERBING AND CHANNELLING, ETC.

  Necessity for kerb -- Section of granite kerb and channel -- Setting
  kerb -- Cost of kerb and channelling -- Necessity for gutter or
  channel crossings -- Gully gratings -- Objects to be attained --
  Drawing of a gully-pit -- Drawing of a buddle-hole -- Mr. Baldwin
  Latham on the subject                                              123

  CHAPTER XIII.
  LIGHTING STREETS.

  Gas v. Electricity -- Public Health Act on lighting -- Different hours
  at which public gas lamps are lighted -- Hints for a contract with a
  gas company -- Supply by meter -- Objections to meters -- Regulators
  -- Lamp-posts -- Lanterns -- Burners -- Numbering lamps -- Formula for
  determining distance of lamps -- M. Servier on spreading light
  uniformly -- Tables of different lights -- Points to be considered in
  public lighting by electricity -- Motive power required -- Machinery
  necessary -- Regulations as regards fire risks -- Lamps -- Value of
  electric light -- Difficulty of photometrical measurement -- Cost of
  electric light -- Mr. Shoolbred’s tables -- Comparative cost on Thames
  embankment -- Value of these investigations -- Acme of all lighting
                                                                     129

  CHAPTER XIV.
  STREET NAMING AND NUMBERING.

  Necessity of naming and numbering streets -- Public Health Act on the
  subject -- Different methods of naming -- Minton’s china letters --
  Cast iron plates -- Painted names -- Enamelled iron -- Wooden figures
  -- Enamelled glass tablets -- Size of letters -- Association of names
  -- Methods of numbering -- Forms of notice to number               149

  CHAPTER XV.
  BREAKING-UP STREETS.

  The law on the subject -- Water Works Clauses Act, 1847 --
  Consideration of the clauses -- What is meant by “plan” -- Specimen of
  specification or plan -- Damage caused to roads by opening them --
  Private individuals breaking-up streets -- Clauses of the Public
  Health Act -- Telegraphs Act, 1863 -- Clauses of this Act --
  Advantages and disadvantages of subways -- Power of individuals to
  open streets for drains -- Clauses of the Public Health Act on the
  subject -- Uncertainty on the subject -- Forms of notices necessary --
  Customs prevailing in different towns                              157

  CHAPTER XVI.
  OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS.

  List of subjects discussed -- Improving line of frontages -- Assessing
  value of compensation -- Removing projections of buildings -- What are
  legal projections? -- Doors or gates opening outwards -- Forms of
  notice necessary -- Vaults or cellar coverings -- Forms of notice
  necessary -- Advantages of an “Easement book” -- Rain water from
  shutes or down pipes -- Form of notice necessary -- Blinds or awnings
  over paths -- Trees overhanging roadways -- Form of notice necessary
  -- Surface water from premises -- Hoardings and scaffolds -- Dangerous
  Buildings -- Tall chimney shafts -- Dangerous rock -- Forms of notice
  necessary -- Temporary obstructions                                174

  CHAPTER XVII.
  IMPROVEMENT OF PRIVATE STREETS.

  The 150th section of the Public Health Act -- Criticisms of this
  section -- Duties of the surveyor in connection with it -- Specimen
  forms of notices -- Carrying out the work -- Taking over private
  streets -- Agreement to take over a road -- What is a “road”? -- Legal
  definition of the term street                                      193

  CHAPTER XVIII.
  NEW STREETS AND BUILDINGS.

  Important duty of surveyor -- Clauses of the Public Health Act --
  Model bye-laws -- What is a new building? -- The term “ground floor”
  -- Alteration of existing buildings -- Deposit of plans -- Clauses of
  the Public Health Act -- Clauses necessary in the bye-laws with regard
  to deposit -- Form of notice in respect of deposit of plans --
  Suggestions for town surveyor in connection with this duty and
  examination of plans -- Supervision of buildings in course of erection
  -- Stringency of bye-laws -- Protection of life from fire necessary --
  Party walls through roofs -- Space at back -- Fee for inspection   206

  CHAPTER XIX.
  SCAVENGING.

  The Public Health Act on the subject -- List of duties involved by the
  clauses of the Act -- What is house refuse? -- Removal of trade or
  garden refuse -- Position of dust bin -- Objections to fixed bin --
  Different methods of collection of refuse -- Public dust bins -- House
  to house call -- Receptacles brought out into streets -- Carts
  employed for scavenging -- Life and cost of wooden carts -- Improved
  sanitary carts -- Disposal of refuse -- Methods adopted in various
  towns -- Destruction by fire -- Cleansing of streets -- Machinery v.
  hand labour -- Durability of brooms -- Scavenging at Liverpool --
  Quantity of material removed from roads -- Cleansing private courts
  and alleys -- Removal of snow -- Mr. Hayward on the subject --
  Clarke’s apparatus -- Hints on removal of snow -- Street watering --
  Several methods described -- Brown’s system -- Mr. Parry on hand-
  watering -- Headley’s machine -- Street watering in Paris -- Bayley’s
  Hydrostatic Van -- Mr. Scott on watering and stand-pipes -- Advantage
  of using disinfectant with water -- Cost of scavenging, &c. -- Heads
  for a contract -- Administration of work without intervention of
  contractor the best                                                221

  CHAPTER XX.
  SEWERAGE.

  Public Health Act on the subject -- Definition of sewer -- Definitions
  of sewerage and sewage -- Requirements of good system of sewerage --
  Position of sewers should be at back of houses -- Form of notice to
  carry sewer through private lands -- Hints for carrying out sewerage
  -- Stamford’s joint -- Pipe sewers -- Drawing of various pipes --
  Causes of breakage -- Causes of chokage -- Separate system --
  Advantages of partial separation -- List of different methods of
  sewerage -- Dry systems                                            251

  CHAPTER XXI.
  SEWAGE DISPOSAL.

  Magnitude of question -- Interception -- List of methods of disposal
  -- Tidal outfalls -- Broad irrigation -- Crops for sewage --
  Intermittent filtration -- Action of earth on sewage -- Mechanical
  subsidence -- Artificial filters -- Screening -- Precipitation -- List
  of chemical processes -- List of chemical ingredients -- Disposal of
  sludge -- Effect of plants on sewage                               263

  CHAPTER XXII.
  VENTILATION OF SEWERS.

  Duty of dealing with noxious sewer vapours -- Germ theory and open
  ventilation -- Open shafts and objections to them -- Shafts against
  dwellings -- Use of rainwater pipes -- Use of lamp posts -- Charcoal
  trays -- Use of chimney shafts -- Lofty shafts -- Failure of furnaces
  -- List of methods tried -- Annihilation of sewer gas -- Composition
  of sewer gas -- Direction of flow -- Importance of disconnecting house
  drains                                                             271

  CHAPTER XXIII.
  PUBLIC CONVENIENCES.

  Clause of Public Health Act empowering their erection -- Selection of
  site -- Construction of Urinals -- Why iron is preferable --
  Description of urinals -- Public w. c. accommodation -- Description of
  a simple w. c. -- Jennings and Macfarlane for urinals              280

  CHAPTER XXIV.
  ARTIZANS AND LABOURERS’ DWELLINGS.

  The Act of 1868 -- Mode of procedure under it -- Amendment of Act in
  1879 -- Further amendment in 1882 -- Importance of this amendment --
  Act of 1875 for improvement of dwellings of working classes -- Mode
  of procedure under it -- Amended by Act of 1879 -- Further amended,
  1882 -- Duties of surveyor under these acts -- Health of model
  dwellings -- Description of industrial dwellings -- Labouring classes’
  Lodging Houses Acts -- Copy of bye-laws under them -- Table of sizes
  of rooms                                                           284

  CHAPTER XXV.
  DEFECTS IN DWELLING-HOUSES, ETC.

  Cellar dwellings -- Clauses of the Public Health Act on the subject --
  Insufficient w. c. accommodation -- Clauses on the subject -- Forms of
  notice to be served -- W. C. accommodation for factories -- Houses
  without a proper supply of water -- Clauses on the subject -- Mode of
  procedure -- Disadvantages of cistern storage                      295

  CHAPTER XXVI.
  HOUSE DRAINAGE.

  Definition of drain -- Difficulty of always deciding what is a drain
  -- Duties of surveyor in connection with house drainage -- Inspection
  of new drains -- Form of “regulations” necessary by a local authority
  -- Difficulty of efficient inspection -- Drains of new buildings --
  Inspection of defective drains -- Several clauses of the Public Health
  Act on the subject -- Procedure necessary to carry them out -- List of
  a few requirements of good house drainage -- Necessity of register of
  all house drains                                                   303

  CHAPTER XXVII.
  PUBLIC PLEASURE GROUNDS AND STREET TREES.

  Law empowering acquisition and maintenance of parks, &c. -- Duties of
  surveyor in connection therewith -- Public playgrounds -- A few hints
  -- List of a few useful shrubs -- Trees in gales -- Planting trees at
  sides of streets -- Qualities necessary in trees for this purpose --
  List of suitable trees -- Precautions necessary -- Grating and grill
  -- Description of Paris planting -- Cost of trees in Paris -- Damage
  to street trees                                                    318

  CHAPTER XXVIII.
  PUBLIC ABATTOIRS.

  Necessity and law for their establishment -- Defects of private
  slaughter-houses -- Legal powers to close private slaughter-houses --
  Particulars of London private slaughter-houses -- Site of public
  abattoir -- The Manchester abattoir -- Accommodation necessary --
  Lairs and pens -- The killing-house -- Floor, drainage, rings, pole-
  axe, lighting, &c. -- Machinery for hoisting -- Plans of public
  abattoir -- Condemned meat department -- Pig-killing department --
  Blood-house -- Tripery -- Tallow market -- Other accommodation -- Dr.
  Chancellor on slaughter-houses -- Difference between public and
  private slaughter-houses                                           328

  CHAPTER XXIX.
  MARKETS.

  Law authorizing their establishment -- Site for a cattle market --
  Accommodation necessary -- Paving -- Cattle enclosures -- Sheep pens
  -- Dimensions of pens and lairs -- Weighing machine -- Markets for
  general merchandise -- List of requirements -- A few hints on their
  accommodation                                                      344

  CHAPTER XXX.
  CEMETERIES.

  The surveyor’s duties in connection with these -- Some legal points to
  be remembered -- Selection of site on sanitary grounds -- Mr. Eassie
  on soils -- Dr. Parsons on requirements of cemeteries -- Unsuitability
  of clay soil -- Amount of land necessary -- Points to be considered in
  laying out a cemetery -- Division of cemetery -- Description of
  sections -- Cemetery rules and regulations -- Suitable trees for
  cemeteries -- Regulations by Secretary of State, 1863 -- Cremation --
  Its great advantages over burial -- Area of some existing cemeteries
  -- Necessity for reliable information as to causes of death        350

  CHAPTER XXXI.
  MORTUARIES.

  Evils arising from keeping corpses -- Some clauses of the Public
  Health Act on the subject -- List of different descriptions of
  mortuaries -- A German Leichenhaus -- Requirements of a mortuary --
  The chapel -- The dead-house -- The post-mortem room -- The coroner’s
  court -- Other accommodation necessary -- Plan of a model mortuary --
  Disinfection -- Apparatus necessary -- Dr. Ransom’s machine --
  Fetching infected clothing                                         365

  CHAPTER XXXII.
  BORROWING UNDER THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD.

  Clauses of the Public Health Act -- Stimulus to public works -- List
  of time for which money can be borrowed -- Mr. Rawlinson on procedure
  and plans, &c., necessary -- Responsibility of Local Government Board
  -- Captain Galton on Government responsibility                     375

  CHAPTER XXXIII.
  CONTRACTS.

  Clauses of Public Health Act -- Public contracts different from
  private ones -- Specifications necessary -- Conclusion -- A list of
  useful books                                                       381




  MUNICIPAL
  AND
  SANITARY ENGINEERS’
  HANDBOOK.




CHAPTER I.

THE TOWN SURVEYOR.


The office of town surveyor was first legalised by the Towns Improvement
Clauses Act 1847 (10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, s. 7),[1] although for some
considerable period prior to this date similar appointments had been
made in several of the more important English towns, notably in the case
of Liverpool. In the following year the legal office of surveyor was
confirmed by the Public Health Act 1848 (11 & 12 Vic. c. 63, s. 37), and
it is now law under the Public Health Act 1875 (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55):
that comprehensive statute, under which all Sanitary Acts are now
included, and which Act will be frequently alluded to in the course of
this book.

The clause which specially refers to the appointment of the surveyor is
as follows:--

“Every urban authority shall from time to time appoint fit and proper
persons to be medical officer of health, surveyor, inspector of
nuisances, clerk, and treasurer: Provided that if any such authority is
empowered by any other Act in force within their district to appoint
any such officer, this enactment shall be deemed to be satisfied by the
employment under this Act of the officer so appointed, with such
additional remuneration as they think fit, and no second appointment
shall be made under this Act. Every urban authority shall also appoint
or employ such assistants, collectors, and other officers and servants
as may be necessary and proper for the efficient execution of this Act,
and may make regulations with respect to the duties and conduct of the
officers and servants so appointed or employed . . .” (38 & 39 Vic. c.
55, s. 189), and these officers (except the medical officer of health
and the inspector of nuisances, when any portion of their salary is paid
out of moneys voted by Parliament _to the powers of the Local Government
Board_), may be removed by the urban authority at their pleasure, which
was not the case when the appointment was first made in 1847.

Here it is necessary to state that for sanitary purposes England and
Wales are divided into two divisions--viz. urban sanitary districts and
rural sanitary districts, the former of these divisions being further
subdivided into boroughs, where the urban sanitary authority is the
mayor, aldermen, and burgesses acting by the council, and districts,
which are under the authority of improvement commissioners or local
boards; the rural sanitary districts are the areas of unions not
included in urban districts, and they are under the authority of the
guardians of the union.

It is my intention to deal more particularly with the duties of a
surveyor acting under an urban authority, but the following section of
the Public Health Act 1875 relates apparently to the appointment of a
surveyor to a rural authority, although no mention is made in this or
any other clause of the Act directly of such an officer by name, except
that amongst the definitions of the Public Health Act the following
appears:--

“‘Surveyor’ includes any person appointed by a rural authority to
perform any of the duties of surveyor under this Act” (38 & 39 Vic. c.
55, s. 4).

The clause I have above referred to is as follows:--

“Every rural authority shall from time to time appoint fit and proper
persons to be medical officer or officers of health and inspector or
inspectors of nuisances; they shall also appoint such assistants and
other officers and servants as may be necessary and proper for the
efficient execution of this Act . . .” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 190).

The following clauses apply to officers of rural as well as urban
authorities:--

“The same person may be both surveyor and inspector of nuisances . . .”
(38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 192).

“Officers or servants appointed or employed under this Act by the local
authority shall not in any wise be concerned or interested in any
bargain or contract made with such authority for any of the purposes of
this Act . . .” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 193).

“Before any officer or servant of a local authority enters on any office
or employment under this Act by reason whereof he will or may be
entrusted with the custody or control of money, the local authority by
whom he is appointed shall take from him sufficient security for the
faithful execution of such office or employment and for duly accounting
for all moneys which may be entrusted to him by reason thereof” (38 & 39
Vic. c. 55, s. 194).

In addition to these clauses there are several regulating the receipt of
money by officers, but these should not affect the town surveyor.
Although in many places he has the onerous duty of paying workmen,
certifying tradesmen’s accounts, and other financial transactions, he
ought under no circumstances to have anything to do with the receipt of
money. Unfortunately, in some of the smaller towns the surveyor is also
employed as rate collector; but as this is evidently a very improper
proceeding, I shall not further allude to it in any manner.

It will be observed that in the foregoing clauses of the Public Health
Act the word “surveyor” is always used, and thus this is the legal title
of those holding such appointments. It is obvious, however, that,
although this title may have well suited the office up to the year 1847,
when it was made the legal title, the prodigious growth of municipal
work during the last 35 years has made it necessary that some change
should be made, and the title altered to that of “engineer,” or some
other similar suitable name. At the present time several different
meanings and occupations are attached to the word “surveyor,” as the
following list will show:--“land surveyor,” “district surveyor,” “county
surveyor,” “road surveyor,” “surveyor of taxes,” “surveyor of customs,”
“quantity surveyor,” “fire insurance surveyor,” “Lloyd’s surveyor,” and
a still more curious instance where an urban authority is itself dubbed
“surveyor of highways” by the 144th section of the Public Health Act
1875; and the title of town surveyor as now applied cannot but lead to
confusion and to perfectly erroneous impressions as to his work and
duties.

Dr. Ackland, in a paper read before the Association of Municipal and
Sanitary Engineers and Surveyors, at a district meeting held at Oxford,
makes the following remarks on this point:--“In the Public Health Act
1875 (the summary of all health enactments) the name of ‘engineer’ does
not once occur in the 343 clauses. He is still the old ‘surveyor’ we all
remember, the plodding, energetic man of highways and byeways . . . but
then the surveyor of the present day may be called on to advise on
anything, from the form and cost of an earthen syphon trap to the
calculation of work to be done by engines which are to supply half a
million of persons with water; to be responsible for the construction of
sanitary mechanisms, from a housemaid’s sink to an intermittent downward
filtration farm.”

There can be but little doubt that it is absolutely necessary for the
town surveyor of the present day to be a competent civil engineer of
great knowledge and varied experience, for he may at any moment be
called upon to advise his corporation upon any of the following
subjects, or to act in any one of the following capacities, in addition
to the multifarious ordinary duties legally devolving upon him as
surveyor under the Sanitary Acts:--

(1.) As engineer for sewerage and sewage works.

(2.) As engineer for water and gas works.

(3.) As engineer for canals, docks, harbour improvements, and river
navigation, or for the protection of coasts against the encroachments of
the sea, and the prevention of floods by rivers.

(4.) As engineer for the construction and maintenance of roads and
bridges.

(5.) As engineer for the construction and maintenance of lines of
tramways.

(6.) As architect for the construction of lunatic asylums, municipal
offices, hospitals, abattoirs, mortuaries, baths and wash-houses,
cemetery chapels, stables, police stations, and other similar works.

(7.) As landscape gardener for the laying out of public recreation
grounds, parks, and cemeteries.

(8.) As quantity surveyor to make estimates of all works, and often
(very improperly) to furnish bills of quantities to intending
contractors.

(9.) As surveyor and valuer to advise his employers on the values, &c.,
of corporate or other property.

(10.) As land surveyor to make surveys of any size that may be required.

(11.) As accountant to examine and rectify the workmen’s wages sheets,
and all tradesmen’s accounts for work performed or goods supplied.

The foregoing list is no exaggeration of the onerous duties of the town
surveyor, and it seems to be a grievous mistake that this officer, whose
importance in all practical sanitary work cannot be over-stated (as
without him no useful municipal work could go on) has been left
unprotected by the Public Health Act of 1875.

In that Act both the medical officer of health and the inspector of
nuisances have received Government protection, whereas the surveyor, the
very officer of all others who necessarily is more likely to come into
collision and to be unpopular with his employers in the faithful
discharge of his duties, has been afforded no protection whatever, but
has been left to the tender mercies of an annually changing body of
municipal governors, “to be removable at their pleasure” (38 & 39 Vic.,
c. 55, s. 189).

On this highly important point I cannot do better than quote several
passages from Mr. Lewis Angell’s interesting address to the Association
of Municipal and Sanitary Engineers and Surveyors on the occasion of
their inauguration in the year 1873:[2]

“The ‘town surveyor,’ according to his opportunities, has done the
country good service, but, surrounded as we have been with obstructions
and difficulties, cramped and restricted by popular prejudices and
private interest, subject to clamour and attack, without protection and
without appeal, it is indeed surprising that we have accomplished so
much. Had such officers been from the first judiciously selected,
adequately remunerated, properly supported, and duly protected, our
influence upon sanitary progress would have been more conspicuous and
our office better appreciated.

“As engineers we do not pretend to a knowledge of medical science, but
it is equally within the knowledge of the average sanitary engineer as
of a medical officer of health that pure air, pure water, properly
constructed houses, and an unpolluted soil are the cardinal conditions
of health. These are mere sanitary axioms. The means by which such
conditions are attained are drainage, ventilation, water-supply, and
other matters entirely within the functions of the engineer. It is the
function of the sanitary engineer to prevent that which the medical
officer of health is called upon to detect. . . .

“In many cases the unprotected surveyor may be required to report to a
protected medical officer the negligence of his own employers. No local
surveyor or engineer can be expected to give cordial and active
assistance in compulsory sanitary work when he is conscious that his
action would be opposed to the views or the interests of his employers,
the public upon whom he is dependent. The existence of such a
distinction between the medical officer and surveyor under the same
board will produce a want of harmony in interest, and must lead to a
divergence of action between the two departments. . . .”

And speaking of the multifarious duties of the town surveyor, Mr. Angell
says: “Any one section of his duties would, under commercial
circumstances, command fair pay according to its importance; but where
cumulative duties are included in the same office, they demand constant
attention, special knowledge, professional experience, and
administrative ability; to which is added the anxiety which the
responsibilities of public office always involve. Such a position in a
commercial concern would receive high remuneration in proportion to the
extent of the undertaking, but unfortunately, our work does not pay a
dividend: it is all expenditure from which the town derives no return
excepting in health and comfort, matters which are neither fairly
assessed, nor duly appreciated; consequently, the municipal engineer is
paid less for his professional knowledge than the contractor’s agent
whose work he directs.”

Speaking further on the subject of Government protection, Mr. Angell
says: “Surveyors appointed under the Towns Improvement Clauses Act were
protected during the existence of the General Board of Health. Sir C.
Adderley’s Public Health and Local Government Bill of 1872 proposed
similar protection. Officers employed under the Poor Laws are fully
protected as to position, emoluments, and superannuation. The
administration of the Poor Laws and the Public Health Acts is now united
in one department under the newly established Local Government Board: it
is therefore in my opinion equally due to Local Board officers, that
they also should be recognised and protected. Without such protection,
sanitary legislation cannot, in the words of the Royal Sanitary
Commission, be ‘active and effective,’ because local officers are too
dependent on their immediate employers to be thoroughly efficient.

“In advocating protection let me not be misunderstood. I do not mean
centralisation or the removal of that proper control which every local
authority should maintain over its own officers. I would maintain intact
the great principle of local government, which has been the bulwark of
our social and political freedom. But local government may degenerate,
and in small towns deteriorate into littleness: local affairs are too
frequently avoided by those who are most fitted by intelligence and
social standing to take part therein. I would simply control in the most
constitutional manner the short-comings or excesses of local government
as is already done in various other departments. I would require that
local officers should be properly qualified and adequately remunerated;
that in the honest discharge of their duties and during good behaviour
they should be protected from the effects of ignorance, narrow
prejudices, and interested clamour, and that they should have an appeal
to a disinterested and judicial body, superior to local feeling. The
demand is reasonable--I ask no more. . . . .”

To these admirable remarks by Mr. Angell on the present position of the
town surveyor I can add but little.

I believe that the sole reason which is given why Government protection
is not granted to the surveyor is the argument used by those in
authority, that if a surveyor disagrees with the corporation he serves,
it is considered better that he should resign his appointment rather
than be protected by the Local Government Board or other central office;
but if this argument is sound, why does it not also apply in a similar
manner to the medical officer of health or the inspector of nuisances?
The real fact no doubt is, that in framing the Public Health Act of
1875, medical men were consulted and not engineers, and this is very
apparent in many of the clauses, which will be fully considered in their
proper places in this book.

The time will no doubt come when the necessity for some change in the
position of the town surveyor will be apparent, and adequate protection
will be afforded him; in the meantime let him strive, by attention to
work, and by daily advancement in scientific knowledge, and in courtesy
to those with whom he is associated, to make the position and power of
the town surveyor felt and honoured as it should be throughout the
kingdom.

  [1] The section is as follows:--“The Commissioners shall appoint,
  subject to the prescribed approval, or where no approval is
  prescribed, subject to approval by one of Her Majesty’s principal
  Secretaries of State, a person duly qualified to act as a local
  surveyor of the paving, drainage, and other works authorized under the
  provisions of this and the special Act . . . . . . and the
  Commissioners with the like approval may remove any such surveyor.”

  [2] _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and
  Sanitary Engineers and Surveyors,’ vol. i. p. 18.




CHAPTER II.

THE APPOINTMENT OF SURVEYOR.


Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of surveyor to a town, or upon a
sanitary authority determining to make such an appointment, the question
is usually relegated to a committee or sub-committee to report upon the
subject, to fix the amount of salary proposed to be given, and frame the
duties of the office.

The following report is one that has lately emanated from an important
English borough, and is given in full as a specimen of such reports, and
as a guide on which a report could be framed; altered, of course, to
such requirements as may be locally necessary:--

_Report of the Special Sub-Committee as to the Surveyor._

(1.) Your sub-committee report that they have, in compliance with the
resolution of the      day of     , carefully considered the steps to be
taken with reference to the vacancy caused by Mr. ------’s resignation,
and they have come to the unanimous conclusion that it is desirable that
the office of surveyor should be continued.

(2.) Your sub-committee have also considered the duties which were
assigned to the office of Mr. ------’s appointment, and they beg now to
submit them, revised in accordance with the present circumstances of the
department, and with the recommendations contained in this report.

(3.) Your sub-committee further recommend that the salary of the
surveyor be fixed at £ . . per annum, and that advertisements be issued
for candidates.

_Duties of the Surveyor._

(1.) To have charge of the repairs of all highways, and to perform all
duties devolving on the council as surveyors of highways.

(2.) To report from time to time to the committee superintending the
same, the state of the several highways and lines of tramway, and as to
the materials wanted or works necessary.

(3.) To prepare all plans, specifications, or instructions necessary in
relation thereto, and as to the materials to be used therein, and to see
that all works are completed according to contracts entered into.

(4.) To engage and dismiss under sanction of the committee all workmen
employed at daily and weekly wages.[3]

(5.) To certify all accounts for work done, materials supplied, and
wages due.

(6.) To have charge of all materials and implements.

(7.) To purchase or contract for, or hire all horses, carts, tumbrils,
stones, flags, gravel, draining pipes, and proper implements and
materials, and all other matters and things, at such prices and in such
manner as the committee shall judge reasonable and expedient, and to
sell or otherwise dispose of the same as he may be directed.

(8.) To have the entire charge and superintendence of the breaking up
and repairing of all streets, for the purpose of laying or replacing gas
and water pipes.

(9.) To inspect and report, in conjunction with the medical officer of
health, upon slaughter-houses preliminary to licences being granted, and
to make the plans and superintend the construction of any
slaughter-houses which the council may hereafter erect.

(10.) To take all levels and surveys which may be necessary for the
purpose of deciding on the best mode of draining the several districts,
or any part thereof, or for the purpose of fixing the levels and
inclinations of any streets or roads, or in anywise relating thereto.

(11.) To carry out the scheme now in course of construction for the
interception of the sewage of the borough, and any future scheme, for
its precipitation, filtration, deodorization, or any other process which
the council may adopt, either within or without the borough.

(12.) To superintend the construction and completion of all tramway
lines and sidings which may be required.

(13.) To prepare, from time to time, schemes for the drainage of the
several districts or any part thereof.

(14.) To prepare all such plans, sections, and specifications as may be
necessary for the due execution of any flagging, paving, sewering, or
other works required to be done, or for entering into any contracts in
relation thereto, and to see that all works are executed in accordance
therewith.

(15.) To measure up and duly certify the execution of all works, and
apportion the cost to the parties chargeable therewith.

(16.) To see that all house drains, which may from time to time be
carried into any public sewer, are made and connected in accordance with
the regulations.

(17.) To give to the several contractors performing any works, orders
for the same in writing only, keeping duplicates thereof, duly entered
in a book to be kept by him for that purpose.

(18.) To prepare all plans, drawings, and estimates required, and to
superintend the execution of all improvements.

(19.) To see that no encroachments be made on any highway or public
place.

(20.) To advise on, and execute, all engineering works, and prepare all
such plans, specifications, and estimates of, and take out quantities
for, such sewers, buildings, bridges, and works as may be required, and
to superintend the erection and execution thereof.

(21.) To have in his charge, and be responsible for, the proper
management of all buildings and properties belonging to the corporation,
or for the repair and maintenance of which the corporation is liable,
except otherwise directed by the council.

(22.) To examine and report upon all plans and elevations of buildings
proposed to be erected or altered upon land sold or leased by the
corporation.

(23.) To inspect and report on plans of new streets to be laid out, of
houses to be built, and of buildings to be erected or altered.

(24) To see that all streets are properly named, and that the name
plates are kept in good order.

(25.) To act as building surveyor in all matters relating to the
execution of the Sanitary and Local Acts, and to examine and certify new
houses as fit for habitation.

(26.) To examine all buildings in a condition dangerous to the public,
to report thereon, and to take such steps as may be necessary to prevent
accidents arising therefrom.

(27.) To prepare all plans and sections for deposit, pursuant to
Standing Orders, with respect to all street improvements, tramways,
gasworks, waterworks, or other works, unless otherwise ordered by the
council, and to prepare all other surveys, plans, and sections required.

(28.) To attend the meetings of the several committees when required.

(29.) To prepare all returns relating to his office that may be required
by the Government.

(30.) To attend in London or elsewhere when required, without extra
charge, excepting only his travelling and hotel expenses.

(31.) To keep accurate permanent records and plans relating to all
properties purchased, leased, or sold, or in possession.

(32.) To devote the whole of his time to the duties of his office, and
not to be engaged in any other office, business, or employment
whatever.

(33.) To report from time to time all and every matter connected with
any branch of his office which, in his opinion, may require the
attention of any committee, and take their instructions thereon.

       *       *       *       *       *

Clauses 18 and 20 in the above list of duties are very comprehensive,
and as a rule a town surveyor’s duties may be summed up in a very few
words--“to do anything that he is requested.” It is, however, better
that some definite instructions should be laid down, and those which I
have given may be taken as a fair specimen of what such duties may be.

Unlike the medical officer of health, who by Act of Parliament is
required to hold a diploma of competency,[4] it is open to anyone to
apply for and obtain the appointment of a town surveyor. This is no
doubt unfortunate, as some test of merit is desirable, and of late years
the necessity of some examination as to competency has been much
discussed.

In order to meet this requirement, the Sanitary Institute of Great
Britain has instituted examinations and granted certificates of
competency for both town surveyors and inspectors of nuisances. The
following particulars of these examinations, and the reasons given for
their necessity, may be of interest, and are given in full.[5]


_Examination of Local Surveyors and Inspectors of Nuisances._

The great and increasing importance of the duties devolving upon local
surveyors and inspectors of nuisances in connection with the various
statutes relating to Public Health and the Sale of Food and Drugs Act,
has led the council of the Institute to establish voluntary examinations
for local surveyors and inspectors of nuisances, and for persons
desirous of becoming such, or of obtaining the certificate of the
Institute.

Each examination occupies a portion of two days. On the first day the
examination of surveyors is continued for four hours, viz. from 2 to 4
and 6 to 8 P.M. and consists of written papers only. Inspectors of
nuisances have two hours’ written examination on the first day, viz.
from 4 to 6 P.M. On the second day the examination for both classes
commences at 11 A.M., and is _vivâ voce_; with one or more questions to
be answered in writing if deemed necessary. A certificate of competence
signed by the examiners is granted to successful candidates.

As rural sanitary authorities are able under the Public Health Act 1875
to obtain almost all the powers of urban sanitary authorities, it is not
considered advisable to make any distinction in the examination of the
two classes of surveyors.

As one person may, under the Public Health Act 1875, be both local
surveyor and inspector of nuisances, candidates wishing to obtain the
double qualification may enter for both examinations on the same
occasion.

Candidates are required to furnish to the council of the Institute
satisfactory testimonials as to personal character, and to give two
weeks’ notice to the secretary previous to presenting themselves for
examination, stating whether they wish to be examined as surveyors or
inspectors of nuisances, or as both.

The fee for the examination must be paid to the secretary, by
post-office order or otherwise, at least six days before the the day of
examination. On receipt of the fee a ticket will be forwarded admitting
to the examination.

The fees payable for the examination are as follows:--

  For Surveyors                £5 5 0
  For Inspectors of Nuisances   2 2 0

Unsuccessful candidates are allowed to present themselves a second time
for one fee.


_Syllabus of Subjects for Examination for Local Surveyors._


_Laws and Bye-Laws._--A thorough knowledge of the Acts affecting
sanitary authorities, so far as they relate to the duties of local
surveyors; also of the model bye-laws issued by the Local Government
Board.


_Sewerage and Drainage._--The sanitary principles which should be
observed in the preparation of schemes for, and the construction of
sewerage works; the ventilating and flushing of sewers and drains; the
internal drainage and other sanitary arrangements of houses, privies,
water-closets, dry-closets, and the removal of refuse; the sanitary
details of builders’ and plumbers’ work.


_Water Supply of Towns and Houses._--The sanitary principles which
should be observed in the preparation of schemes for, and the
construction of water-works; the various ways in which water is likely
to become polluted and the best means of ensuring its purity.


_Regulations of Cellar Dwellings and Lodging Houses._--General
principles of ventilation; the amount of air and space necessary for men
and animals; the means of supplying air, and of ensuring its purity.


_Highways and Streets._--The sanitary principles which should be
observed in the construction and cleansing of streets and roads.


EXAMINATION PAPERS, NOVEMBER 6, 1879.

_Questions for Surveyors, November 6, 1879, 2 to 4 o’clock._

1. Define street; state the law applicable to every description of
street in an urban sanitary authority district, and the rights and
obligations and duties of sanitary authorities, owners and occupiers
therein.

2. What are the relative advantages of circular and egg-shaped sewers;
in what case are they respectively preferred?

3. Give a specification of a water-tight sewer. Describe and give a
sketch of the form of man-hole which you consider best adapted for
ordinary town sewers, and state the rule which you adopt for determining
the amount of ventilation to be afforded in a main street sewer.

4. In what way does the size and shape of the sewer affect the velocity
of sewage flowing through it? If a nine-inch pipe sewer, laid at an
inclination of 1 in 200, gives a velocity of 3 feet per second, what
velocity will it give when laid at an inclination of 1 in 800, the pipe
running full in each case? Will this velocity suffice to keep it clear
from deposits? Describe the various modes which may be resorted to for
flushing sewers.

5. Give a description of the process termed intermittent downward
filtration. State what area of land you would require, with a gravelly
soil, for applying this method of purifying sewage to a town with a
population of 1000 inhabitants, and state the arrangements you would
adopt for dealing with the rain-water falling on the roofs, yards, and
streets.

_November 6, 1879, 6 to 8 o’clock._

1. In reporting upon the source of water supply for a town, what are the
points to which you would direct your attention?

2. Give a sketch of a ~D~ trap, an ~S~ trap, a ~P~ trap, and a pan water
closet (plan of a dwelling-house annexed).

3. Criticise the arrangements of this residence as to position of rooms,
walls, doors, fire places, windows, &c., from a sanitary point of view.

4. Describe the drainage arrangements shown on the plan. Say whether
they are satisfactory; if not, in what way are they faulty?

5. Sketch on the plan any other system of drains which you would think
preferable.

6. Describe in detail the arrangements necessary for the water supply
of the residence, a bath being fixed in the room over the serving room,
a W.C. on the first floor over that on the ground floor, and a
housemaid’s sink near.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is, of course, open to consideration whether the Sanitary Institute
of Great Britain is the proper authority to hold these examinations or
not; but there is no doubt that some such examination is necessary, and
would be welcomed by nearly all town surveyors in order to more firmly
secure their positions; and the Sanitary Institute is entitled to every
credit for having taken the initiative step in the matter.

Under the present system of appointment to the office of town surveyor
those seeking that office must be prepared to work hard to obtain it,
and to give up some considerable time to its acquisition. Tact,
patience, and perseverance are indispensable qualities when seeking such
appointments, and the following suggestions on this matter may be of
use.

The appointment usually rests finally with the whole body of the town
council or corporation, even if a sub-committee or committee has been
appointed in the first case to make some selection of candidates. The
candidates thus selected by the committee are usually requested to
appear before the whole body of the town council, who then make the
appointment from amongst them.

The first thing a candidate should do when he hears of a vacancy
occurring in the office of a town surveyor, or sees an advertisement
requiring a surveyor’s services, is to obtain fresh testimonials from
those persons of position and influence for whom he has worked or who
know him professionally. These testimonials, with any very good old ones
(but not too many of either), should be sent by post to the town clerk
or person mentioned in the advertisement, with a formal,
carefully-worded application for the appointment.

If canvassing is not prohibited, a list of the members of the town
council, with their addresses, should then be procured, to whom printed
copies of the application and testimonials should be sent, accompanied
by an autograph letter asking that the application and testimonials
should be read.

This should be followed up (if possible, immediately), by a journey to
the town and a personal visit to each member of the council or
corporation, not necessarily for the purpose of soliciting a vote, but
with a view to making the acquaintance of the members of the corporation
and to identify the applicant with his testimonials; and in these visits
great tact and patience are necessary. It is also of importance to seek
and obtain all the outside influence that is possible, in order to bear
upon the members of the corporation, by means of letters of
introduction, and informal testimonials as to eligibility for the
appointment, and personal character and position, &c.

Canvassing on behalf of oneself is extremely unpleasant and harrassing
work; but wrong as the system may appear to be, it is not easy to see
how, in municipal government, any other method can be adopted, and the
visit of the candidate to each member gives the latter an opportunity of
asking him questions and satisfying himself as to his qualifications,
and thus he will not feel he is acting blindly when he gives his vote in
favour of that candidate whom he thinks, after a personal interview, the
most suitable for the appointment.

  [3] This seems to be an undue interference with the control which a
  surveyor should always have over his men.

  [4] “A person shall not be appointed Medical Officer of Health under
  this Act unless he is a legally qualified medical practitioner” (38 &
  39 Vic. c. 55, sec. 191).

  [5] _Vide_ ‘Calendar of the Sanitary Institution of Great Britain for
  the year 1880.’




CHAPTER III.

THE SURVEYOR’S DUTIES.


It will be observed on reference to the list of the duties of the
surveyor, given in the preceding chapter, that the first on the list is
as follows:--

“To have charge of the repairs of all highways, and to perform all
duties devolving on the council as surveyors of highways.”

The necessity for these duties are obvious when we turn to the Public
Health Act 1875, and read the following sections:--[6]

“Every urban authority shall within their district, exclusively of any
other person, execute the office of and be surveyor of highways, and
have, exercise, and be subject to all the powers, authorities, duties,
and liabilities of surveyors of highways under the law for the time
being in force, save so far as such powers, authorities, or duties are
or may be inconsistent with the provisions of this Act; every urban
authority shall also have, exercise, and be subject to all the powers,
authorities, duties, and liabilities which by the Highway Act 1835, or
any Act amending the same, are vested in and given to the inhabitants in
vestry assembled of any parish within their district.

“All ministerial acts required by any Act of Parliament to be done by or
to the surveyor of highways may be done by or to the surveyor of the
urban authority, or by or to such other person as they may appoint” (38
& 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 144).

“All streets being or which at any time become highways repairable by
the inhabitants at large within any urban district, and the pavements,
stones, and other materials thereof, and all buildings, implements, and
other things provided for the purposes thereof, shall vest in and be
under the control of the urban authority. The urban authority shall from
time to time cause all such streets to be levelled, paved, metalled,
flagged, channelled, altered, and repaired as occasion may require; they
may from time to time cause the soil of any such street to be raised,
lowered, or altered as they may think fit, and may place and may keep in
repair fences and posts for the safety of foot-passengers. Any person
who without the consent of the urban authority wilfully displaces, or
takes up, or who injures the pavement, stones, material, fences, or
posts of, or the trees in, any such street shall be liable to a penalty
not exceeding five pounds, and to a further penalty not exceeding five
shillings for every square foot of pavement, stones, or other materials
so displaced, taken up, or injured; he shall also be liable, in the case
of any injury to trees, to pay to the local authority such amount of
compensation as the court may award” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 149).

The duties thus devolving upon the town surveyor by reason of these
sections and the orders of the council are very considerable. The
following table gives a list of the principal subjects which will
require his attention; all of which will be considered in due course in
this book.


_List of Duties devolving upon a Town Surveyor as “Surveyor of
Highways.”_

(1.) The construction and maintenance of highways or streets,
including--

  (_a._) Roads formed of broken stones or “metal,” commonly called
  macadamised roadways;

  (_b._) Streets paved with granite cubes or setts;

  (_c._) Streets paved with wood;

  (_d._) Streets paved with asphalte.

(2.) The construction and maintenance of footwalks or footpaths,
including the different materials of which these are formed.

(3.) The breaking of stone for road metal.

(4.) Steam rolling.

(5.) The necessary notices and specifications under the 150th Section of
the Public Health Act 1875, for the purpose of compelling private
streets to be properly sewered, levelled, paved, metalled, flagged,
channelled, lighted, and made good.

(6.) The lighting, cleansing, and watering of streets.

(7.) The naming and numbering of streets.

(8.) The planting of trees along the sides of footwalks.

(9.) Obstructions caused by builders’ rubbish or by hoardings and
scaffold poles; and also by dangerous or defective cellar coverings.

(10.) The damage caused to footpaths by allowing water from private
premises to flow over them, and the nuisance caused by defective
rain-water gutters or shutes.

(11.) The damage caused to roadways by the laying or removal of gas and
water mains and services, and the surveyor’s powers and duties in
connection therewith.

(12.) The importance, especially in old towns, of laying down improved
building lines of frontage in the narrower or crooked streets.

(13.) The examination of all plans of proposed new streets or buildings.

(14.) The supervision of all new streets and buildings whilst their
construction is in progress.

(15.) Dealing with all buildings in a condition dangerous to the public.

Each of the foregoing list of duties will be dealt with in separate
chapters in addition to other matters which will be treated, but before
closing this chapter a few words upon the subject of “meetings” may be
of use.

It will be observed upon reference to the list which I have given of
the duties of the surveyor, that there is one which says, “To attend all
meetings of the board, and committee meetings, except where his
attendance has been previously dispensed with; to attend upon the
chairman when so required.”

The result of this order is that a very large percentage of the
surveyor’s time has to be devoted to attendances at long meetings of the
Board or town council, and at the numerous committee and sub-committee
meetings which are appointed under it.

This work is doubled where, as in some towns, the corporation and their
committees sit in a dual capacity, viz. as the council proper, and the
council as the urban sanitary authority; this generally involves two
ordinary meetings of the whole body each month, and probably at least
six committee meetings a week, leaving the surveyor but scanty time to
look properly after his works.

With regard to these committee meetings it is necessary that each should
have some distinguishing title descriptive of the class of work over
which it has jurisdiction, and in selecting names for them the following
list may be of some service:--Finance Committee, General Purposes
Committee, Law and Parliamentary Committee, Surveyor’s Committee, Land
and Estates Committee, Rates and Taxes Committee, Streets Committee,
Lighting and Cleansing Committee, Navigation of Port Committee, Public
Grounds Committee, Sanitary Committee, Drainage and Sewerage Committee,
Markets Committee, Properties for Sale Committee, Works Committee, Water
Committee, Gas Committee, Watch Committee, Health Committee, Library
Museum and Arts Committee, Baths Committee, Parks, Gardens, and
Improvement Committee, Streets Improvement Committee, etc. etc.

The surveyor should always endeavour to be punctual in his attendance at
the council meetings and those of the committees, as to be late is
always looked upon with disfavour. His reports should as much as
possible be in writing, so that there should be no misunderstanding as
to what his advice is on any subject. To save trouble and expense it is
well that all drawings of new schemes should be first submitted to a
committee in pencil, as they are frequently much altered; this is very
vexing if they have been neatly and highly finished. It must not be
forgotten that the gentlemen who form municipal bodies give their time
gratuitously, and everything should be done to save it as much as
possible. It is an excellent plan and a great convenience, if a surveyor
will have a series of named and numbered pigeon holes in his office
corresponding to his committees, in which to place all papers, drawings,
correspondence etc., which he intends to bring up to the next meeting of
a committee; thus saving himself flurry at the last moment before the
meeting, in endeavouring to find the papers he wants. With his varied
duties, correspondence, interviews, meetings, inspections,
investigations, reports, drawings, and calculations, the motto of a
surveyor’s office should be “method.”

  [6] For full particulars and explanations of the various Highway Acts
  see ‘The Powers and Duties of Surveyors of Highways and of other
  Authorities with regard to the Management of the Public Highways,’ by
  Alex. Glen, M.A., etc.




CHAPTER IV.

TRAFFIC.


Before a surveyor can decide upon the best material with which the
streets of his town shall be paved, it will be well to consider the
question of the class of traffic they will have to bear.

It must be remembered that three distinct interests have to be
considered in dealing with this question, viz. (1.) The rate-payers,
upon whom the cost of construction and maintenance of streets falls.
(2.) The owners and employers of horses and vehicles who principally use
the streets; and (3.) The inhabitants of the adjoining premises, who
would be annoyed if the material selected were unduly noisy or dirty. In
addition to these considerations, much depends upon local circumstances;
the class of trade upon which the welfare of a town is dependent must
not be lost sight of. A pavement suitable for a busy, pushing
manufacturing city may not be suitable for a quiet agricultural or
cathedral town, or for a town which is used as a health resort. Again,
the question of the most adaptable materials must be considered, and the
climate and physical character of a town should enter largely also into
this question.

To condense the requirements of a good roadway into as small a compass
as possible, the following may be given as some of its principal
requisites:--

(1.) It must not be extravagantly costly in its first construction.

(2.) It must be durable and require the least possible amount of repairs
at the least cost.

(3.) It must be safe, firm and hard, with an even face and yet giving
sufficient foothold to horses.

(4.) It must be as noiseless as possible.

(5.) It must be so constructed as to be quickly laid down and repaired
when broken up for water, gas, drains, or other purposes.

(6.) It must be of strong foundation, so as to carry the heaviest weight
without subsidence.

(7.) It must be of such a shape as will throw off all surface water at
once.

(8.) It must be of such materials as will make a minimum of dust or mud.

(9.) It must be easily cleansed.

(10.) It must be non-absorbent of impurities or moisture of any kind.

(11.) It must give easy traction upon its surface.

(12.) It must not cause jolting to the traffic.

(13.) It must not injure horses’ legs or hoofs.

Of the above requirements No. 1 affects the ratepayers alone; Nos. 3,
11, 12, 13, affect the traffic only, except that the occupiers of shops
are indirectly affected by them; No. 4 affects both traffic and
occupiers, and No. 10 affects the occupiers principally. The remainder
of the requirements affect all three interests.

With reference to the wearing effect of traffic upon the surface of the
roadway, no standard has yet been arrived at by which this can be
determined with accuracy. In France a great number of observations and
experiments have been made from time to time by the engineers of the
Ponts et Chaussées, but their practice has been to count the number of
“collars” passing a given section of a roadway in a given time,
irrespective of the weights, speeds, or number of wheels such collars
may be drawing. Mr. Deacon, the former Borough Engineer of Liverpool,
has, however, reduced traffic to a standard of tons per yard width of
roadway per annum. This he effected by having the traffic in any street
carefully watched for a certain definite time, the number of vehicles,
their character and approximate weight being noted as well as the number
of horses by which they were drawn, and their number of wheels.

The effect of the traffic thus tabulated, arranged, and reduced to ton
yards per annum, can be ascertained upon any roadway, and Mr. Deacon has
given the results of his observations in a valuable paper on the subject
of street carriage pavements which he read before the Institution of
Civil Engineers.[7]

Sir John MacNeill has estimated that 80 per cent. of the total wear of a
road is due to traffic, the remaining 20 per cent. being due to
atmospheric causes. Of this 80 per cent. 60 per cent. he considers is
due to the action of horses’ hoofs where the traffic is fast, and 44·5
per cent. where the traffic is slow. General Morin estimates the wear of
a road due to horses’ feet to be two-thirds of all causes. There can be
no doubt that the action of horses’ feet, shod as they are with heavy
iron shoes with long toe pieces and heels, must have a destructive
effect upon the surface of a carriage-way, and this may be easily
observed when watching the ruts formed by any continuous line of traffic
in a roadway.

The following remarks from a report of the Society of Arts on this
subject may here be of interest. “It may be mentioned that as respects
the horses’ shoes, attention has long been called to its defects by Sir
Francis Head and others, but Sir Joseph Whitworth now points out the
achievement of a decided and important improvement, which will have a
large effect in road conservancy, as well as the reduction of noise. The
improvement consists in the fastening of a rim of hardened steel, of
about half-an-inch square, to the horses’ feet, and letting the frog
grow to its natural size. One effect is to reduce by five-sixths the
weight of the old shoe, or in other words to reduce by five-sixths the
weight of the iron hammers constituted by the common horses’ shoes,
pounding the road surface, and creating road dust and dirt, and
distributing it about. The saving in this respect, as well as the
reduction of noise by the reduction of the weight of rim, and also the
saving of road wear, would warrant the imposition of the stimulus of a
tax, or a toll upon heavy horses’ shoes to hasten this removal.”[8]

Up to the present date, however (1883), no general change has been
effected in the manner of shoeing horses, notwithstanding these
admirable remarks of Sir Joseph Whitworth upon the subject.

With reference to the question of traction upon roads General Morin, in
his ‘Expériences sur le Tirage des Voitures,’ states that the resistance
to the rolling of vehicles upon solid metalled roads and pavements is
proportional to the weight and inversely proportional to the diameter of
the wheels. On solid roads he states that the resistance is nearly
independent of the width of the tires when they exceed 3 or 4 inches,
but on a compressible face it decreases in proportion to the width of
the tire; the resistance further increases with the velocity on hard
roads, but does not do so when they are soft.

The following table is almost universally now adopted as showing the
traction upon level roads formed of different materials, asphalte being
taken as the standard of excellence in this respect.

  Asphalted roadway                            1·0
  Paved roadway, dry and in good order         1·5 to 2·0
    „      „     in fair order                 2·0  „ 2·5
    „      „     but covered with mud          2·0  „ 2·7
  Macadamised roadway, dry and in good order   2·5  „ 3·0
       „         „     in a wet state          3·3
       „         „     in fair order           4·5
       „         „     but covered with mud    5·5
       „         „     with the stones loose   5·0  „ 8·2

There are four forces constantly at work tending to destroy the momentum
of vehicles passing along a roadway: they are gravity, collision,
friction, and the resistance of the air.

The first of these is lessened by easy gradients in a road, the second
can be overcome to a great extent by evenness of surface, the third by
hardness, and the fourth, as well as all the others, by giving
sufficient foothold to the animal drawing the vehicle.

Another excellent table[9] prepared from experiments made by Mr. Amos on
different descriptions of pavement in the City of London may be useful,
and is here given:--

  -------------------+---------+-------+--------+--------------
                     | Speed   |       |        |Tractive Force
     Road Material.  |in Miles |Draught|Fraction| in Decimals
                     |per hour.|in lbs.|of Load.| of the Load.
  -------------------+---------+-------+--------+--------------
  Gravelly Macadam in|  6·945  |126·6  | 1/45·3 |    ·0219
  a side street      |  3·45   |114·322| 1/50·3 |    ·0197
                     |         |       |        |
                     |  5·15   | 70·963| 1/81·1 |    ·0123
  Granite pitching by|  3·196  | 41·932| 1/137·3|    ·0072
  side of tramway    |  2·557  | 47·572| 1/121  |    ·0082
                     |         |       |        |
  Granite Macadam    |  4·239  |262·886| 1/21·9 |    ·0456
  “freshly laid”     |  2·775  |242·726| 1/23·7 |    ·0421
                     |         |       |        |
                     |  5·025  | 91·525| 1/64·9 |    ·0158
  Asphalte Pavement  |  3·56   | 69·753| 1/82·5 |    ·0121
                     |  5·687  | 84·268| 1/68·3 |    ·0111
                     |         |       |        |
                     |  3·932  |118·163| 1/48·7 |    ·0205
  Wood Pavement      |  3·278  |102·412| 1/56·2 |    ·0177
                     |  3·827  |100·066| 1/57·5 |    ·0173
                     |         |       |        |
  Macadam road, very |         |       |        |
  good on Victoria   |  6·65   |109·06 | 1/52·7 |    ·0181
  Embankment         |         |       |        |
  -------------------+---------+-------+--------+--------------

The following table from Law’s ‘Rudimentary Treatise on Civil
Engineering’ shows the force required to move a load of a ton weight on
different descriptions of roadway, the limiting angle of resistance, and
the greatest inclination which should be given to the road being also
stated.

  --------------------------------+--------+-----------+------------
                                  |  Force |           |  Greatest
                                  | in lbs.| Limiting  |inclination
      Description of the Road.    |required|  angle    |which should
                                  | to move|    of     |  be given
                                  | a ton. |resistance.|to the road.
  --------------------------------+--------+-----------+------------
                                  |        |   °   ′   |
  Well laid pavement              |    33  |   0  50   |   1 in 68
                                  |        |           |
  Broken stone surface on a bottom|    46  |   1  11   |   1  „ 49
  of rough pavement or concrete   |        |           |
                                  |        |           |
  Broken stone surface laid on an |    65  |   1  40   |   1  „ 34
  old flint road                  |        |           |
                                  |        |           |
  Gravel road                     |   147  |   3  45   |   1  „ 15
  --------------------------------+--------+-----------+------------

As a matter of fact, however, the gradient of a macadamised road should
not, if possible, exceed 1 in 20,[10] experience having shown that a
horse, unless the hill is a very long one, is able to draw his ordinary
load for a level up such an inclination, whereas, if it is steeper he is
sometimes stopped altogether, even though the carter tries the zigzag
route so as to obtain an artificial ease of gradient.

The table given in ‘Molesworth’ upon the same subject is too well known
to be repeated, and another table may be found in Sir Henry Parnell’s
work on roads, which gives a comparison between the draught necessary on
a well-paved road at 2, on a well-made, clean macadamised road at 5,
whereas on a wet and muddy gravel or flint road it rises to 32!

Mr. T. D. Hope, of Liverpool, assuming the power of traction at 100,
gives the following table:--

                          Weight drawn.
  Level macadamised road    27   cwt.
    „   granite pavement    30·5   „
    „   wood       „        54·75  „

And Lieut. Crompton has given the resistance of wheels in lbs. per ton
on different surfaces as follows:--

  Very good pavement    35 lbs.
  Good macadam          60   „
  Ordinary ditto        90   „
  Newly-laid gravel    200   „
  Soft grass land      300   „
  Newly-laid metal     440   „

Here “newly-laid metal” comes out very badly, and points to the
necessity of rolling, of which I shall speak in a future chapter.

Whilst on the question of wheel resistance, it may be well to note that
the small front wheels of a waggon cause considerably more harm to a
macadamised road than the larger hind wheels. In the smaller diameter
any loose stone or obstruction is pushed along in front for a
considerable distance, often tearing up the surface of the road, whereas
in the other case the stone is forced into its place or crushed as under
a roller.

On the question of “safety” to traffic, Mr. Haywood, the eminent
Surveyor of the City of London, has caused several most complete
observations to be made from time to time, the results of such
observations being detailed by him in various reports. Amongst other
useful information compiled by him, he has ascertained that a horse will
travel 446 miles upon a roadway paved with blocks of wood without a
fall, 191 miles upon asphalte, and 132 miles upon granite setts. I
cannot do better than give verbatim his remarks upon this point:--

“Slight rain makes both asphalte and wood more slippery than they are at
other times. On asphalte the slipperiness begins almost immediately the
rain commences, wood requires more rain before its worst condition
ensues. The slipperiness lasts longer upon wood, on account of its
absorbent nature, than it does upon the asphalte; when dry weather comes
after the rain, when asphalte is in its most slippery state, and the
horses fall on it very suddenly, _on wood their efforts to save
themselves are more effectual_; wood also is frequently in that peculiar
condition of surface in which horses slip or glide along it without
falling. A small quantity of dirt upon asphalte makes it very slippery,
wood requires a large quantity. Slipperiness can be temporarily cured on
both pavements; on the asphalte by sprinkling it with sand, on the wood
by sprinkling it with gravel. The result in both cases is dirt. _The
sand thrown on asphalte helps to wear it out, the gravel thrown on wood
tends to preserve it._ When a horse falls on asphalte it has difficulty
in getting up; on wood it rises more readily.”[11]

In streets crowded with traffic, the constant stopping and starting,
especially on any surface that is slippery, is very trying to horses.
Attention has lately been directed to this point with a view to the
storage of some power in a vehicle, either by the compression of a
spring in stopping or by some other mechanical means, in order that in
starting the driver may at will liberate this power so as to assist the
horse in overcoming the inertia of his load. These trials, however, have
not at present met with much success.

Before closing this chapter on traffic, it will be well to point out
that nearly all vehicles travelling rapidly can pass each other safely
if allowed a clear space of eight feet; hence all roadways should, if
possible, be made of a width between the kerbs of some multiple of
eight: a convenient width for the footpaths, so far as foot-passenger
traffic is concerned, is found to be one-fifth of the entire width of
street. It is scarcely necessary to add that vehicles pass each other
on the left side, pedestrians on the right. It is not easy to assign a
cause for the former beyond custom, except that the whip is held in the
right hand, and in consequence free play is given for its use as the
driver sits on that side and can watch his wheels in passing. In France
and other countries the right side is the “rule of the road.” In the
case of pedestrians it is perhaps more convenient for many reasons to
pass on the right side, one being that the umbrella or parasol is always
carried in the right hand, which is also used to remove the hat when
bowing, and another because one’s tendency in passing any obstacle is to
give way with the left shoulder. For regulating the traffic and for the
protection of foot passengers, “sanctuaries,” as they are termed, have
often to be constructed by surveyors in broad streets or awkward centres
of traffic, and it is well to place a lamp-post on these sanctuaries, on
which may be advantageously fixed a notice, “Keep to the Left,” so as to
regulate vehicular traffic. On the lamp-posts at the edge of the
footpaths it is also sometimes customary to fix small enamelled iron
plates bearing the inscription on both sides, “Keep to the Right,” so as
to regulate the pedestrian traffic.

Of the danger to life and limb to pedestrians in London much has
frequently been said, and no wonder, when we consider the number of
persons who are daily injured and sometimes killed according to the
Registrar-General’s returns. Some years ago it was proposed to erect
light iron bridges over the most dangerous crossings approached by
winding stairs, but “time is money” in the mighty metropolis, and the
scheme was abandoned because it was felt that most persons would prefer
the risk of being run over rather than spend the time in ascending and
descending the necessary steps for this purpose.

  [7] _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
  Engineers,’ vol. lviii.

  [8] _Vide_ Report of the Society of Arts on the application of Science
  and Art to street paving and street cleansing of the metropolis, 1875.

  [9] Ibid.

  [10] Experiments made by the direction of the French Government on the
  tramway between Sèvres and Versailles, showed that a horse on a level
  tramway draws three-and-a-half times the weight, at the same speed and
  with the same expenditure of power, that he can do on an ordinary
  road. Up a gradient of 1 to 100, he is capable of drawing 2·25 times
  the weight he can do up the same gradient on an ordinary road, and up
  a gradient of 1 to 25 he can draw one-and-a-half times the load he can
  do under similar circumstances on the ordinary road.

  [11] ‘Report on accidents to Horses on Carriageway Pavements,’ by
  William Haywood (1874).




CHAPTER V.

MACADAMISED ROADWAYS.


I do not propose in this work to speak of any of the engineering
operations necessary to lay out or construct long lines of connecting
roadways, as that is a duty which seldom falls to a town surveyor to
perform, and there are a great number of treatises and books upon the
subject already published. The object of this chapter will be to give
some information and hints upon the construction and maintenance of what
are known as macadamised roads, suitable for urban and suburban traffic.

There can be little doubt that roadways of this description are
expensive luxuries where the cost of their maintenance, owing to
excessive traffic or other causes, exceeds 2_s._ per square yard per
annum, but they are often necessary luxuries when the requirements of
the locality are considered, a point to which I drew attention in the
preceding chapter upon “Traffic.” For purposes of what may be styled
“pleasure traffic,” macadamised roadways are unequalled when well
constructed and maintained, but there are many objections to them which
will be considered in their place in this chapter.

The word macadamised is, as is well known, derived from one John Loudon
Macadam, who in the year 1816 first took up the question of putting
broken metal upon a road instead of the boulders previously used.[12]
His name, being rather a peculiar one, has been attached to this
description of road ever since.

As a matter of fact, the “macadamised” roadways of the present day are
constructed after a method introduced by Thomas Telford as an
improvement upon Macadam’s principles, and a perusal of the two
following specifications will, I think, show that there is not very much
difference between the method introduced by Telford and that followed at
the present time.


_Specification of a Roadway as designed by Thomas Telford more than
fifty years ago._[13]

“Upon the level bed prepared for the road materials, a bottom course or
layer of stones is to be set by hand in form of a close, firm pavement;
the stones set in the middle of the road are to be seven inches in
depth; at nine feet from the centre five inches; at twelve feet from the
centre four inches; and at fifteen feet three inches. They are to be set
on their broadest edges lengthwise across the road, and the breadth of
the upper edge is not to exceed four inches in any case. All the
irregularities of the upper part of the said pavement are to be broken
off by the hammer, and all the interstices to be filled with stone chips
firmly wedged or packed by hand with a light hammer, so that when the
whole pavement is finished there shall be a convexity of four inches in
the breadth of fifteen feet from the centre.[14]

“The middle eighteen feet of pavement is to be coated with hard stones
to the depth of six inches. Four of these six inches to be first put on
and worked in by carriages and horses; care being taken to rake in the
ruts until the surface becomes firm and consolidated, after which the
remaining two inches are to be put on.

“The whole of this stone is to be broken into pieces, as nearly cubical
as possible, so that the largest piece in its longest dimensions may
pass through a ring of two and a half inches inside diameter.

“The paved spaces on each side of the eighteen middle feet are to be
coated with broken stones or well-cleaned stony gravel up to the foot
path or other boundary of the road, so as to make the whole convexity of
the road six inches from the centre to the sides of it, and the whole of
the materials are to be covered with a binding of an inch and a half of
good gravel free from clay or earth.”

If the above specification, written more than fifty years ago, is
compared with one of the present date, it will be seen that there is a
strong resemblance between them.


_Specification of a Roadway as now executed._

The cross section of the roadway _when finished_ is to be an arc of a
circle, with a rise of 1 in 27 from kerb to the centre of the roadway
each way.[15] The roadway, when consolidated and finished, to be 12
inches in depth at the gutters and 15 inches at the centre, diminishing
gradually from this point right and left to the depth named. The gutters
to be 2 feet in width, formed of stone setts 6 inches by 6 inches, and
laid in sand, on a firmly consolidated surface of small broken stone or
gravel.

The earth road-bed on which the surface formation is to rest is to be
excavated to the required depth, and when graded and shaped to its
proper form, it is to be thoroughly and repeatedly rolled with a steam
roller, and all depressions which then appear are to be filled with the
same material as the road-bed, and rolled until the whole be uniformly
compact and firm.

On the road-bed thus formed and compacted, a bottom layer of stone of a
depth of 8 inches at the centre of the road, and gradually diminishing
to 6 inches at the kerb, is to be set by hand, to form a close, firm
pavement. The stones are to be laid, with their largest side down, in
parallel lines across the street, breaking joint as much as
practicable.[16] The width of the upper part of the stone not to be more
than 8 inches, nor less than 6 inches. The stone not to exceed 15 inches
in length. After being set closely together, the stones are to be firmly
wedged by inserting a bar in all possible places, and placing between
them stones as nearly as possible of the depth of the pavement, until
the whole is bound in position. Projections of the upper part of this
course are to be broken off, care being taken not to loosen the
pavement; and no wedging is to be done within 20 feet of the face of the
work being laid. The small interstices are to be filled in with stone
chips firmly wedged with hammers. The whole is to be thoroughly rammed
and settled to place, and all undue irregularities of surface broken
off.

On the foundation course must be laid an intermediate layer of broken
stones, varying in size from 3 inches in their greatest diameters to 1
inch in their smallest diameters. These irregular-sized stones may be
either the “tailings” of the screened stones, or may be raked from the
quarry, and placed on the roadway without being machine-broken; but they
must nevertheless be so laid as to compact solidly, and must be clean
broken stone, free from dust and dirt, and within the dimensions given
above. This intermediate course must be 4 inches in depth at the centre
of the roadway, gradually decreasing to 3 inches in depth at the
gutters; it is to be thoroughly rolled with the steam roller until it be
firm, compact, and solid. On its upper surface it must be identical in
rise and form to the cross-section of the finished pavement, as
specified above. In the laying of this course of stone a small quantity
of binding material is to be used, sufficient only to fill up the
crevices, and render this portion of the pavement solid. Preferably the
binding is to be of fine screened gravel or sand, which is to be
sufficiently watered during the process of rolling, so that the “licking
up” of the road material, and its adherence to the rolling-wheels may be
prevented.

On the intermediate course is to be laid the surface layer of broken
stone.[17] It must be 2¹⁄₂ inches in depth, and the stones must be
practically uniform in quality, and as near an approach to a cube in
form as possible. Each stone used in this layer must have passed through
a 2¹⁄₂-inch circular hole, and all stones that are wedge-shaped, and do
not approach uniformity of measurement on their sides, are to be taken
from the road with properly shaped rakes, and no stones allowed to
remain which are not sound, strong, and equable in size and quality of
material. The stones are to be raked into an even layer, and the steam
roller passed over them twice or thrice. After this a quantity of fine
screened gravel or sand is to be thrown on and sufficiently sprinkled to
moisten the mass without “licking up.” The rolling is then to be
continued (working the roller backwards and forwards, gradually from the
gutter to the crown), with an occasional light watering of the pavement,
until the cross-section be exact according to specification, the
interstices filled in, the roadway firmly compacted and solid, and all
excess of binding removed from the surface of the finished pavement.[18]

Telford’s object was the complete separation of the road metal from the
subsoil by a firm and regular foundation, and this system has ever since
held its ground. The advantages to be gained in constructing a roadway
in this manner may be summed up as follows:--

(1.) Economy of construction, as a considerable quantity of metalling is
saved; only 3 inches of properly broken stone and a little binding
material being necessary, the foundation of the roadway (which really
carries the traffic) may be made of a quality of stone unsuitable for
road metal, or even of bricks or stones from old buildings that are
being pulled down.

(2.) The prevention of the rising up or “spewing” of the clay or other
soft material on which the roadway rests.

(3.) A solid foundation is secured which will successfully resist the
weight and percussion of the traffic.

(4.) The increased facility for the drainage of the roadway water being
ruinous to it.[19]

Instead of forming a paved or “pinned” foundation for macadamised
roadways, sometimes what is called “hard core” is placed at the bottom
of the road upon the surface formation.

This “hard core” is made of very heterogenous materials, often the waste
products of the house refuse depôt, and consists of ashes, old pots and
pans, meat tins, old bottles, shells, and a variety of similar articles;
sometimes the core is made of burnt ballast, but in no case does it make
so good a foundation as stones set by hand.

Concrete has also been employed as a foundation with great success, but
it is very expensive, and is seldom used except under streets paved with
either granite, wood, or asphalte, of which I shall speak hereafter; for
if the traffic was so great as to necessitate the use of concrete for a
foundation it would surely be better to give the roadway a more durable
surface than macadam.

The following tables, showing the thickness of the foundation and
metalling of broken stone roads, is from a paper on roadways, read to
the Association of Municipal and Sanitary Engineers, by Mr. James Hall,
Borough Surveyor of Stockton, and may be of use to those who would like
to know what proportions to use.

  -------------+-------------------------+---------------+------------
               |   Pinned Foundations.   | Broken Stones.| Concrete.
               +--------+---------+------+-------+-------+-----+------
               |Pinning.|Covering.|Metal.| Under.| Upper.| Con-|Metal.
               |        |         |      |       |       |crete|
  -------------+--------+---------+------+-------+-------+-----+------
               |   in.  |   in.   |  in. |  in.  |  in.  | in. |  in.
  Country roads|    6   |    3    |   4  |   9   |   4   |  4  |   3
  Suburban  „  |    9   |    3    |   5  |   9   |   6   |  6  |   5
  Town streets |    9   |    6    |   5  |  15   |   6   | 10  |   5
  -------------+--------+---------+------+-------+-------+-----+------

Chalk has sometimes been used for the bottom of a roadway, but where
this is likely to be affected by frost it is the worst material that can
be used, as it is likely to blow up the roadway.

With regard to the annual outlay upon macadamised roadways, the
following comparative tables[20] prepared by Mr. Ellice Clark, the then
Surveyor of Derby, may be of interest.

  ---------------+-------+--------------------------------------------
                 |       |               Annual Outlay.
                 +-------+----+------+--------+-------+-------+-------
                 |       |    | Sink-|        |       |       |
                 |       |    | ing  |        |       |       |
                 |       |    |fund 3|        |       |       |
                 |  Ori- |    |  per |        |       |       |
                 | ginal |    | cent.|        |       |       |
                 |  cost |    | com- |        |       |       |
                 |  per  | In-| pound|        |       |       |
   Description of| square|ter-|inter-|  Main- | Scav- |       |
      Pavement.  | yard. |est.| est. |tenance.|enging.|Gravel.|Total.
  ---------------+-------+----+------+--------+-------+-------+-------
                 |_s. d._|_d._| _d._ |_s.  d._|_s. d._|  _d._ |_s. d._
  Wood pavement  |15  1·5| 7·5| 10·1 | 0   1·0| 0  2·7|   5·0 | 2  2·3
                 |       |    |      |        |       |       |
  Val de Travers |       |    |      |        |       |       |
    compressed   |18  0·0| 9·7|  ..  | 0   3·6| 0  0·4|   ..  | 1  1·7
    asphalte     |       |    |      |        |       |       |
                 |       |    |      |        |       |       |
  Granite setts  |       |    |      |        |       |       |
    7 inches by  |       |    |      |        |       |       |
    3 inches laid|       |    |      |        |       |       |
    over a layer |17  9·0| 9·6|  0·5 | 0   1·3| 0  2·5|   ..  | 1  1·9
    of 12 inches |       |    |      |        |       |       |
    of cement    |       |    |      |        |       |       |
    concrete     |       |    |      |        |       |       |
                 |       |    |      |        |       |       |
  Macadam in     |       |    |      |        |       |       |
    south of     | 4  9·0| 2·1|  ..  | 3   6·0| 1  0·0|   ..  | 4  8·1
    England      |       |    |      |        |       |       |
  ---------------+-------+----+------+--------+-------+-------+-------

  -------------+------------------+------------------
               |   Load of Mud    |Traffic per Annum
    Material.  |    per area.     |per yard of width.
  -------------+------------------+------------------
               |superficial yards.|       tons.
               |                  |
  Macadam      |        344       |       25,000
  Granite setts|        500       |       50,000
  Wood         |       1666       |       25,000
  Asphalte     |       4000       |      500,000
  -------------+------------------+------------------

The following is a table of the cost of streets in Paris per square yard
per annum.[21]

  ------------------------+------------+----------+---------
  Description of Pavement.|Maintenance.|Cleansing.| Total.
  ------------------------+------------+----------+---------
                          |  _s._ _d._ | _s._ _d._|_s._ _d._
  Stone Pavement          |   0   4·50 |  0   3·37| 0   7·87
  Macadam                 |   0   9·25 |  0   7·31| 1   5·26
  Asphalte                |   0  10·20 |  0   4·17| 1   2·37
  ------------------------+------------+----------+---------

The cost of maintaining macadamised roadways as compared with that of
granite setts has been said to be as high as 5 to 1 and that this cost
if capitalised for 12 or 13 years will equal the first expense, interest
on money, and the necessary repairs for a granite paved roadway.

The following table gives the cost per annum per square yard for the
maintenance of macadamised roadways in different places, so far as I
have been able to collect them:

                             _s._ _d._       _s._ _d._
  Bristol                          4     to   1    0
  Charing Cross (London)                      5    0     (now paved)
  Exeter                           6      „   2    6     including
                                                         cleansing
  Glasgow                                          8¹⁄₂
  Leeds                           10      „   1    2
  Liverpool                        2      „   2    6
  Manchester                       6      „   1    8
  Merthyr Tydfil                                   4¹⁄₂
  Newcastle                   1    3                     including
                                                         watering
  Paris                            9¹⁄₄   „  10    9
  Parliament Street (London)                  3    6     repairs only
  Regent Street (ditto)                       3    7     (now paved with
                                                         wood)
  Stockton                         9      „   1    6
  Sheffield                   1    8      „   2    0
  Wakefield                                   1    0     all paved
                                                         streets now.

In Birmingham the macadamised streets have worn down 6 inches in one
year, with a traffic of 2484 vehicles passing in 10 hours.

With reference to the great cost of maintenance in Paris, the following
particulars[22] may here be given;

“The surface of the street is picked by gangs of men, metal from 2¹⁄₂ to
9 inches in thickness is then laid on, a coating of sand is then spread
upon it, it is watered and rolled at per kilometre ton, that is, at per
ton weight of roller per kilometre travelled, at a cost of about
15·33_d._ per ton mile for the first 250,000 ton miles, and at reduced
rates for additional service. The materials used for the roads are
flints costing 4_s._ 6¹⁄₂_d._ per cubic yard for light traffic roads;
for medium traffic, hard millstone at 11_s._ 4_d._; and for the heaviest
and greatest traffic, porphyry at 15_s._ 9_d._ The average total cost of
maintenance of the streets is 1_s._ 8¹⁄₂_d._ per square yard per annum
for the first-class roads, and 1_s._ 1¹⁄₂_d._ for the lighter traffic;
the highest cost for maintenance is as high as 10_s._ 9_d._ per square
yard, the lowest 9¹⁄₄_d._ per annum.”

It may be well to mention that 73 per cent. of the streets in Paris are
paved, 5 per cent. are coated with asphalte, and 22 per cent. are
macadamised.

The contour, or best form of cross section that should be given to a
roadway, has often exercised the minds of engineers, but for all
practical purposes evenness of surface and regularity of section in a
macadamised roadway are of more importance than the slight difference
between straight lines and curves, which might only tend to confuse the
workmen. Formerly it was the practice to employ a complicated gauge in
the form of a straight-edge fitted with plummet or level and sliding
bars, but a good eye, assisted by a long straight-edge and spirit-level
and three boning rods, is generally found to be sufficient, and if the
centre of the roadway is kept level with the heel of the footpath, a
sightly cross-section is generally the result; or say 6 inches to 9
inches higher in centre of a roadway 30 feet in width between the kerbs,
3 inches to 4 inches where it is from 18 to 20 feet in width.

The following detailed section of a macadamised roadway is one which I
am in the habit of specifying for suburban districts, as it is easily
set out and constructed, and answers all purposes most admirably.

[Illustration]

The total width of street is 36 feet, of which the roadway takes 24,
leaving a footpath 6 feet in width on each side.

The surface of the finished roadway is a segment of a circle, the crown
being level with the heels of the footpaths on each side; the formation
surface is parallel with it, and of course the depth of this and the
thickness of foundations and metal must depend upon local circumstances.
It will be seen that the haunches are drained with 3-inch common
drain-pipes. This may be omitted if the ground is thoroughly dry, but it
is often a great help to a road.

The paths, kerbing, and channelling will be described in their
respective chapters.

It must be borne in mind that on a perfectly level road a more convex
section is necessary than on a gradient.

It is wrong to make the sides of a roadway weaker than the centre,
especially in streets with shops on each side, or on hills where drags
are likely to be used. On hills, too, be it remembered, the channels
should take the surface water; any ruts from wheel tracks acting as
watercourses are disastrous. Hauling timber on a macadamised roadway is
also very damaging.

The great objections to macadamised roadways are as follows:--

(1.) They manufacture too much mud and dust.[23]

(2.) They are too absorbent.

(3.) They are very noisy and damaging to vehicles and horses when fresh
metalled.

(4.) They constantly require mending, but never seem quite sound.

(5.) They are frequently encumbered by men and carts engaged in either
repairs, cleansing, or watering.

(6.) They are very expensive to maintain and cleanse.

(7.) They are bad for a horse to fall upon, as such falls generally
damage the knees.

The following notes upon the maintenance of macadamised roadways may
here be of service:--

(1.) Roads should be inspected in wet weather, as hollows and other
imperfections are then easily detected; a hollow place extends very
rapidly if neglected.

(2.) All ruts should be filled in at once. If there are three parallel,
the centre rut should be first filled in; the traffic is thus slightly
diverted, as a horse will avoid new metal.

(3.) Ruts should not be allowed to form; the surface of the road ought
never to lose its regular section.

(4.) A road should be thoroughly repaired directly it shows the least
sign of being fairly worn all over.

(5.) The right season of the year for repairs is the autumn, although
where a steam roller can be used almost any time will do. If the surface
of the road is very hard it should be “lifted”[24] previous to repairs.

(6.) All loose stones should be picked off at once or put together in
hollow places upon the roadway, as, if allowed to remain, they are not
only dangerous to horses, but are liable to be crushed, or to be forced
through the skin of the roadway, thus causing it damage.

(7.) Water lodging upon a road does great mischief, but it should not be
let off by digging a trench with a pickaxe to the side of roadway, as is
sometimes done.

(8.) A roadway when very dry sometimes suffers through disintegration of
the surface.

(9.) Scraping the mud off a roadway may damage it by loosening stones;
sweeping the surface when wet is best.

(10.) A heavy shower does a road good by washing it; a continuous
drizzle, especially after frost, is very ruinous to a roadway.

(11.) A good cleansing is sometimes worth a coat of metal.[25]


_Bituminous Roadways._

In some towns in England bituminous or asphalte macadamised roadways are
made. This consists in mixing ordinary coal tar with the road metal
ordinarily employed for macadamised roads, only it must be borne in mind
that the metal employed must be limestone or some other soft material,
otherwise it will not wear down evenly with the tar, and thus a lumpy
surface will be produced in course of time.

The method of mixing is by heating the stone, which has of course been
previously broken to the required size, and then thoroughly mixing and
incorporating it with the tar. This is then carried to the roadway, is
spread in the ordinary manner and well rolled to the proper contour, a
surface being afterwards given to it by a coating of about 2 inches
thick, composed of a similar mixture, the stones of which are of much
smaller size.

Another method is to place about 6 inches of the broken metal described
above upon the necessary foundation. Upon this a boiling mixture
composed of about 50 gallons of creosote oil and 1 ton of pitch is
poured until every interstice is filled with the mixture. Whilst this is
still warm, a thin layer of small broken stone is spread upon the
surface and well rolled; more small stones or chippings are added, and
the whole is rolled until the surface of the roadway has attained its
proper contour and presents a perfectly smooth and clean appearance,
little inferior to that of real asphalte.

Dry weather is essential whilst this class of roadway is in course of
construction, and they require careful watching, as, upon the skin
becoming broken, the whole roadway soon breaks up. They have, however,
many advantages over ordinary macadamised roadways when finished, not
the least of them being their imperviousness to moisture, and the ease
with which they are cleansed.

  [12] The first road “engineer” in this country was John Metcalf of
  Knaresborough, who was born in 1717, and who, although totally blind,
  was the first person to introduce a methodical system of road repairs.
  _Vide_ ‘Roads and Road Makers,’ by Henry Alexander Glass.

  [13] _Vide_ ‘A Treatise on Roads,’ by Sir H. Parnell (1833).

  [14] The total width of roadway being thirty feet.

  [15] It is necessary to give a new roadway more convexity than it will
  have when finished, for however carefully it is raked or attended to
  when being rolled, the top is sure to flatten and spread towards the
  haunches.

  [16] Instead of parallel lines it is sometimes well to place these
  stones diagonally from centre to kerb or “herring-bone” fashion, thus
  greatly facilitating the under drainage.

  [17] In metalling a road it is better to put on the coats gradually,
  than to give the whole thickness of metal at once.

  [18] The method adopted in Chicago, U.S.A., for forming their roadways
  is as follows:--The road bed is prepared of the proper contour and
  well-rolled with a 15-ton steam roller until it is even, firm, and
  compact; on this bed rubble stone is carefully placed by hand with its
  broadest surface downwards, then 12 inches of metal are added 6 inches
  at a time, thoroughly rolled to bond it well, it is then topped with 4
  inches of crushed trap rock or some other equally hard stone, which
  will not disintegrate through the action of the weather, nor pulverise
  under the pressure and wear of vehicles upon it; this is again,
  thoroughly well rolled so as to compact and bind it together.

  [19] “If roads be kept dry they will be maintained in a good state
  with proportionally less expense. It has been well observed that the
  statuary cannot saw his marble, nor the lapidary cut his jewels
  without the assistance of the powder of the specific materials on
  which he is acting; this, when combined with water, produces
  sufficient attrition to accomplish his purpose. A similar effect is
  produced on roads, since the reduced particles of the materials, when
  wet, assist the wheels in rapidly grinding down the surface.”
  Parnell’s ‘Treatise on Roads,’ 1883. More modern writers have likened
  macadamised roadways to “stone mills on which the stones are ground
  into dust when dry, or mud when wet.”

  [20] _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
  Engineers,’ vol. lx.

  [21] _Vide_ ‘Annales industrielles de Paris,’ Oct. 21st and Nov. 4th,
  1877.

  [22] _Vide_ ‘Annales industrielles de Paris.’

  [23] A report of the Paddington Vestry on “wood and other pavements,”
  (1878) states macadam as a mud producing material is twelve times
  worse than wood, and six times worse than granite cubes.

  [24] This is also sometimes called “stocking” or “chequering,” and
  consists of making furrows across a roadway with a sharp pickaxe,
  about a couple of inches in depth, thus removing any irregularities,
  and also allowing the new metal to bed properly.

  [25] In Birmingham, good cleansing is said to have reduced the amount
  of metal necessary for the maintenance of the roadways from 20,000
  tons per annum to 13,000 tons.




CHAPTER VI.

ROAD METAL AND BREAKING.


The only true test of the fitness of any stone for use as a road metal
is by an experimental trial upon a certain length of roadway; but in
making the first selection for such trials it is well to make the
following investigations:--

(1.) Ascertain from local persons, such as masons, quarrymen, and
others, their opinion of the qualities of the stones in the
neighbourhood.

(2.) Make a trial of the stone for toughness. This can be done by
setting a good stone-breaker to work upon a heap of the stone as
quarried and carefully watching how much he can break in an hour.[26]

(3.) Ascertain what power the stone has to resist abrasion. This is done
in France by putting the broken metal into a revolving cylinder and then
carefully noting by weight what the cubes lose by contact with each
other. Another plan may be adopted by pressing the stone against a
grindstone with a uniform pressure, and noting the loss caused by such
contact.

(4.) The power to resist compression may be easily ascertained by
placing small cubes in an hydraulic press and noting under what
pressures each cube will crush.

(5.) The effect of weather is not easily ascertained artificially,
although it is suggested that a good test may be made by soaking the
stone in a saturated solution of sulphate of soda; and then on exposure
to the air, if soft, it is said the stone will disintegrate as if under
the action of thaw succeeding frost.[27]

The specific gravity of a stone is no criterion whatever as to its
fitness. Clay-slate has a higher specific gravity than a tough flint,
and yet the former is almost useless as a road metal; the latter, on the
contrary, often making excellent roadways.

The qualities necessary for a really good road metal are hardness,
toughness, not easily decomposed or affected by the weather, and at the
same time the stone when broken ought to have some power of cohesion
without the necessity of much binding material. The question of cost I
put aside at once, as it is well known that the best road metal is
always the cheapest where there is much or heavy traffic.

Local circumstances must to a great extent determine what stone to use
upon a roadway, but the following list may be of use:--


_Syenite._--This is a granite in which hornblende takes the place of
mica, and is an excellent road material; the darker the colour the more
durable it is found to be.


_Granite._--This should have more felspar than quartz, and have as
little mica as possible; the closer the grain the better. Coarse-grained
granites soon decompose.


_Trappean Rocks._--Some of these are excellent for road metal. Basalts
of dark colour and close grain should be selected. Greenstones with
similar characteristics are good; as is also Whinstone.


_Gneiss._--Is inferior to granite; it has mica in layers and is not a
good road metal.


_Clay Slates._--These are useless, as they crumble on exposure or
degenerate into mud.


_Limestone._--The Metamorphic, Silurian, and Carboniferous limestones
may be used if crystalline in appearance, but the Lias and Oolitic are
of little use.[28]


_Sandstones._--Some of these, if cherty or containing a large percentage
of iron, may be used; but as a rule they are quite unfitted for use as a
road metal.


_Flints._--These, if tough, make excellent roadways; but unfortunately
they are sometimes too brittle for heavy traffic. Surface-picked flints
are better than those from a quarry.[29]


_Pebbles._--These are found on sea shores and river beds. They are
composed of very various rocks, and are much water-worn and rounded;
when broken they sometimes answer very well if mixed with gravel to bind
them.


_Gravel._--This, if of a flinty character, and not too much mixed with
earthy matter, makes good roads for light traffic, if carefully watched
or well rolled during formation. Pit gravel should always be screened
through wire screens of 1¹⁄₂ to 1³⁄₄ gauge, and the small can be used
for footpaths.

In some places it is difficult to obtain any natural stone for the
purposes of road metal; in these cases slag from blast furnaces or
ordinary clinkers from furnaces are sometimes used. Oyster shells are
used on the roadways near the Gulf coasts[30] and charcoal in Michigan,
United States.[31] I have myself made a most excellent roadway with
coral on the coast of Jamaica, and no doubt many strange materials have
been, and still are, used for this purpose.

“I never mix” is an adage that should be followed by surveyors as
regards road metal. Do not mix a soft material with one that is harder
for either construction or maintenance of a roadway; the effect is what
is known as a “bumpy” road, arising from the fact of the soft stone
wearing faster than the hard. The hardest metal should be kept for the
top or surface layer of the roadway.

As an instance of the extreme difficulty besetting the question of the
best material for road metal, I will here give a table showing the
comparative coefficients of quality assigned to them by the engineers of
the French Department of the Ponts et Chaussées.[32]

COEFFICIENTS OF QUALITY OF ROAD MATERIALS.

  Granitic gravel                23·8
  Quartz gravel                  21·4
  Trap                           20·0
  Quartz                         10·0 to 25·0 (in one instance 4·8)
  Basalt                         12·0  „ 20·0
  Porphyry                       10·0  „ 20·0 (in one instance 5·0)
  Quartzite                      11·0  „ 18·0
  Devonian schist                16·0
  Schist                          4·0 to 12·0
  Sandstone                      12·0  „ 16·0
  Granite                         6·0  „ 20·0 (generally 10·0 to 12·0)
  Syenite                        12·0
  Gneiss                          9·0 to 12·0
  Silicious pebbles and gravel    8·0  „ 19·0 (in one instance 6·0)
  Silex                           8·0  „ 16·0
  Chalk flints                    7·0  „ 11·6
  Silicious limestone             6·0  „ 18·0 (generally about 10·0 to
                                              12·0)
  Compact limestone              14·0
  Magnesian limestone            16·0
  Carboniferous limestone         9·0
  Oolitic limestone               5·0 to 12·0
  Lias limestone                  5·0  „ 10·0
  Juranic limestone               5·0  „  8·0
  Limestone                       5·0  „ 12·0
  Mean of all France                          10·63

It will be seen by the above table how different are the results
obtained from materials of the same character.

Breaking stone for the purpose of using it as a road metal was, until
comparatively recent years, always effected by hand; now, as in other
cases, machinery has stept in and somewhat supplanted manual labour.
Hand-broken road metal, however, still finds favour with road surveyors;
it is better broken, and in some districts, the occupation finds
employment for persons who otherwise would be thrown on the rates for
support.

In breaking stone by hand the breaker sits and strikes the stone with a
small cast-steel chisel-faced hammer, weighing about one pound, at the
end of a long, straight-grained but flexible ash stick.[33] The breaker
also has another hammer, weighing about five pounds, with which he
reduces the size of the large stones before breaking them into the
proper size for road metal. This latter size is often a matter of
choice, some engineers preferring it to be broken so small as will pass
through a ring of only 1¹⁄₂ inch in diameter; others are content with 3
inches, especially where the roads are steam rolled. An old method of
gauging used to be “such a size as the stone breaker could put in his
mouth,” but this was unsatisfactory to all persons concerned, and “to
pass all ways through a ring of 2¹⁄₂ inches internal diameter” is now
the size most generally adopted.

Mr. Codrington says[34] “a good stone breaker will break 2 cubic yards
of hard limestone to the ordinary gauge in a day, and some men will
break more. Hard silicious stones and igneous rocks can only be broken
at the rate of 1¹⁄₂ or of 1 cube yard per day; of some of the toughest,
such as Guernsey granite, a man can only break on an average half a cube
yard per day. River gravel, field stones, or flints, which are already
of a small size, can be broken at the rate of 3 or 4 cube yards per
day.”

This may be taken as fairly representing a day’s work, the price for
breaking however must vary considerably in different localities on
account of the variety of the stones to be broken and the value of
labour; in some districts the road metal does not cost more than 1_s._
per cube yard, in others 2_s._ 6_d._ and 2_s._ 8_d._ is not considered
too high, and it was to meet and reduce this great expense that steam
stone-breaking machines have been introduced. These machines are known
as “Ellison’s,” “Newall and Archer’s,” “Hope’s,” and “Blake’s,” the
latter being that which is best known and most generally used in this
country.

[Illustration: “ARCHER’S” STONE BREAKER.]

[Illustration: “BLAKE’S” STONE BREAKER.]

[Illustration: “NEWALL AND ARCHER’S” STONE BREAKER.]

The foregoing illustrations will give a general idea of the manner in
which the stone is broken or crushed between strong iron jaws; in all
cases a revolving perforated screen is necessary (not shown in the
drawings) to separate the stone broken to proper gauge from that which
is too large, and also from the spalls or chippings.

The Blake’s or “Blake Marsden’s” machines are of various sizes and
weights; the following particulars with respect to them, as advertised,
may be of use.[35]

  ------------+----------+---------+---------------+-------------
     Size of  |          |         |               |
   machine at | Approxi- |         |  Total weight |
     mouth,   |   mate   |         |  of machine   |
  showing what| quanti-  |         |  with wheels, |
    size of   |  ty of   | Nominal |  axles, horse |
   stone each |road metal| horse-  | shafts, auto- | Price of[36]
  machine will|  broken  | power   |matic screening|   machine
      take.   | per hour.|required.|apparatus, etc.|  complete.
  ------------+----------+---------+---------------+-------------
     inches.  |   cube   |   H.P.  | tons cwt. qrs.| £  _s._ _d._
              |  yards.  |         |               |
     10 ×  8  |    3¹⁄₃  |     3   |   5    6   0  |157  0    0
     12 ×  8  |    4     |     3   |   5   11   0  |167  0    0
     15 ×  8  |    5     |     5   |   6   19   0  |200  0    0
     15 × 10  |    6     |     6   |   8    5   0  |220  0    0
     20 × 10  |    8     |     8   |  10    2   0  |265  0    0
     24 × 13  |   12     |    10   |  15    5   0  |390  0    0
     24 × 17  |   13     |    14   |  16    2   0  |415  0    0
     24 × 19  |   14     |    16   |  19   17   0  |440  0    0
     30 × 13  |   14     |    16   |  16    2   0  |440  0    0
  ------------+----------+---------+---------------+-------------

Mr. Till, the Borough Engineer of Birmingham, speaking of the work done
by one of Blake’s machines in 1874, says:[37] “The stone-breaking
machine at Holliday Street will break on an average 40 tons of ragstone
per day, at a cost, exclusive of wear and tear of machine, of 10¹⁄₂_d._
per ton, but it produces 16 per cent. of dust or fine stone; of the
remainder one-fifth has to be rebroken by hand, the whole is very
irregular in size and very flaky in comparison with hand-broken stone.
The machine is much more efficient in breaking granites or pebbles. It
has, however, been found very useful during the last two years, in
consequence of the difficulty of obtaining labour.”

Mr. Jacob, the Borough Engineer of Barrow in Furness, read an excellent
paper on the subject of stone-breaking machinery to the members of the
Association of Municipal and Sanitary Engineers, at their meeting in
Manchester in 1875,[38] giving a full description of one of Blake’s
machines, to which I will refer my readers.

Mr. Codrington[39] gives the result of breaking whinstone in a 16-inch
by 9-inch Hope machine, from which it appears that the total cost,
including wages, coal, oil, cottonwaste, etc., wear and tear of
machinery, and, I presume, interest on first cost of machine, was about
1_s._ per cube yard. This effected a saving of 10_d._ per cube yard as
compared with the same stone broken by hand, and the machine broke 40
tons of stone per diem.

To make a stone-breaking machine pay, it is necessary:

(1.) To give it nearly constant work.

(2.) That the stone to be broken shall be too tough to break
economically by hand.

(3.) That the machine shall be at the quarry, so as to save the expense
of much handling.

(4.) To exercise care in feeding, to give it a sufficient supply without
allowing an undue quantity of stone to pass in at one time.

(5.) As about 20 per cent. of grit or dust is produced, this must be
used for foot-paths, or as a binding material for roads, or in asphalte
or tar paving.

In addition to the grit which is produced, a great many long and thin
pieces of stone pass through the machine, which have to be again broken
by it before they could be used as road metal; and having once taken
this form, they will frequently pass several times through the machine
before they get properly broken.

The wear and tear of a stone-breaking machine is very considerable, as
can be easily imagined; it has been known to reach as high as 62·5 per
cent.[40] of the first cost of the machine in one year. The objections
to stone-breaking by machinery are principally:

(1.) In some districts labour can be successfully employed in this
manner.

(2.) Hand-broken stone is sharper in fracture, as it is done by a blow
and not by gradual pressure, whereas machine-broken stone is often flaky
or with rounded edges, and frequently each stone may be cracked and
shaken by the pressure.

(3.) Want of uniformity in the size of the stones.

The smaller the stone is broken the heavier a cubic yard of it will
weigh, as the percentage of vacant space between each stone will be
less. It has been found by experiment, however, that 55 per cent. of
ordinary road metal is solid, so that the weight of a cubic yard of it
can easily be ascertained in the following manner.[41]

Multiply the weight of a cubic foot of any stone by 27 to bring it to a
cubic yard, and then multiply this by 0·55: the result will be the
weight of a cubic yard of the same stone when broken for metalling.

A cubic yard of Guernsey granite broken to pass through a 2¹⁄₂ inch ring
has been weighed, and gives an average of 1 ton 3 cwt. 2 qrs.

                                      tons cwt. qrs.
  A cube yard of flint weighed          1   1    3
     „       „   pit gravel weighed     1   4    3
     „       „   limestone weighed      1   3    0

A cubic yard of ordinary broken road metal will, when properly spread,
cover an area of about 30 square yards of surface of a roadway.

The following specimen specification for the supply of stone either
unbroken or broken may be of use.


_Specification for the Supply of Road Metal._

(1.) The road metal must at all times be clean and free from clay or
other dirt, and fully equal to the sample; if required to be broken,
each cube must have a square face and sharp edges, and pass all ways
through a 2¹⁄₂ inch ring.

(2.) The metal must be delivered in (_name of town_) free of all charge
to the corporation, either at a railway station or at one of the depôts
of the corporation, at the option of the contractor, such option to be
declared in the tender.

(3.) The metal must be supplied on the order of the borough engineer in
such quantities as he may specify, and must be delivered within the time
specified in the order. The contractor shall not be required to supply
and deliver more than    tons in any one week; but the corporation will
be at all times ready to take the metal in larger quantities.

(4.) The bill of lading or railway invoice shall be taken as _primâ
facie_ evidence of the weight of metal supplied; but the corporation
retain the right to test the accuracy of such bill of lading or railway
invoice, by passing the metal over a weighbridge as it is received.

(5.) Metal delivered at a depôt by carts shall be measured when broken
and paid for at the rate of    cwt. per cubic yard.

(6.) The corporation retain the right to reject all metal which shall
not be equal to the sample, or at their option to pay a reduced price
according to its value.

(7.) Quarterly payments will be made by the corporation on the
certificate of the borough engineer, and within one month from the date
of such certificate.

(8.) The borough engineer shall be the sole judge as to the fitness of
the metal supplied, and his certificate, in writing, shall be conclusive
evidence upon the point as between the corporation and the contractor.

(9.) If the contractor shall make default in the supply and delivery of
road metal in accordance with the terms of this specification, and
within the time specified for the purpose in the order of the borough
engineer, the corporation shall be at liberty to obtain such road metal
as they may deem fit and necessary from another source, and any excess
in price or other loss they may consequently incur, shall be recoverable
by them from the contractor as liquidated and ascertained damages.

(10.) Tenders must be sent in only on the prescribed form, and the
person tendering must insert in his tender the name of two persons who
will join him in a joint and several bond to the corporation in the sum
of   _l._ for the due performance of the contract.

(11.) Each person tendering must send to the office of the borough
engineer a sample of the road metal he offers, accompanied by a full
description, and the name and position of the quarry from which it is
produced; such sample to be not less that one cwt. in weight, and to be
retained by the corporation in the event of the tender being accepted.

(12.) The corporation do not bind themselves to accept the lowest or any
tender; and they further retain the right to reject a contractor in the
event of his failing to find sureties to their satisfaction in
compliance with the 10th condition.

(13.) The word “corporation” shall mean the mayor, aldermen and
burgesses, of        in their capacity as the urban sanitary authority
for       . The word “contractor” shall mean the person whose tender is
accepted, and who has signed these conditions; and the words “borough
engineer” shall mean the engineer to the said corporation for the time
being.

Since writing this chapter my attention has been directed to a
stone-breaking machine which is said to substitute a “knapping” for that
of the usual crushing motion which is so generally the great defect in
these machines: I allude to that known as “Baxter’s patent
knapping-motion stone breaker,” by which a rapid jerk or blow is given
instead of the slow crushing movement, thus (it is contended) causing
less waste from dust and chippings, and also less strain of the
machinery and less power to drive it.

  [26] Toughness is not all that is required. Leather would be very
  difficult to break with a hammer, but it would not make a good road
  metal.

  [27] I have tried this experiment, but without success, except on such
  soft stones as were evidently unfitted for use as a road metal.

  [28] Many hundreds of miles of roadways in this country are made with
  limestones; they often make an excellent surface, as they possess a
  considerable power of binding together, but weather and very heavy
  traffic affect them considerably: as they all have a strong affinity
  for water, their very power of thus cementing themselves together
  causes a quantity of dust in dry, and mud in wet weather.

  [29] A flinty or quartzose stone seems to harden with exposure. This
  is notably the case in pebbles; old pebble paving taken up and broken
  makes a most hard and durable road metal.

  [30] ‘Roads, Streets and Pavements,’ by Q. A. Gillmore, p. 10.

  [31] _Ibid._

  [32] _Vide_ ‘The Maintenance of Macadamised Roadways,’ by Thomas
  Codrington, p. 33, a most excellent work upon this subject.

  [33] Mr. W. Bold considered a hammer weighing 1¹⁄₄ lb. of an
  elliptical form, pointed at the ends, the area of each end being about
  ¹⁄₁₀₀th of a square inch, to be the most suitable to break hard
  stones. _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings, Institution of Civil
  Engineers,’ vol. i. (1840) p. 50.

  [34] ‘The Maintenance of Macadamised Roads,’ by Thomas Codrington, p.
  38.

  [35, 36] No doubt the price of the machine varies with the price of
  iron, etc.

  [37] _Vide_ ‘Report of the Borough Surveyor of Birmingham to the
  Paving and Street Improvement Sub-Committee,’ p. 11.

  [38] _Vide_ ‘Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and Sanitary
  Engineers,’ vol. ii. p. 76.

  [39] _Vide_ ‘The Maintenance of Macadamised Roadways,’ by Thomas
  Codrington, p. 41.

  [40] _Vide_ ‘Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and Sanitary
  Engineers,’ vol. ii. p. 82.

  [41] _Vide_ ‘The Maintenance of Macadamised Roadways,’ by Thomas
  Codrington, p. 45.




CHAPTER VII.

ROAD ROLLING.


The march of civilisation has decided that road rolling is a necessity
for macadamised roads, instead of allowing the stones of which they are
composed to be worn in by the traffic, as was formerly the custom. In
Calcutta bullock rollers were used so long ago as the year 1855, and it
was the cruelty of this operation that suggested to Mr. W. Clark the
necessity for a steam roller,[42] the outcome of which was the
well-known roller as manufactured and supplied by Messrs. Aveling and
Porter of Rochester, and now so generally used throughout this country,
as well as in American and other foreign towns.[43]

Steam rolling saves money as well as suffering, and the legislature have
recognised the importance of a sanitary authority becoming possessed of
a steam roller by permitting money to be borrowed for the purchase of a
roller as for a permanent work. (Sect. 234 Glenn’s Public Health Act
1875, footnote to Sub. Sect. (1).)

Mr. Albert W. Parry, the Borough Surveyor of Reading, has prepared some
tables on the subject of steam road rollers, from information he
received on this subject, in answer to some questions he addressed to
the surveyors of a number of towns a few years ago. It appears from this
tabulated statement that thirty-three 15-ton steam rollers were in use,
six 10-ton rollers, one 21-ton roller, one 8-ton roller, one 9¹⁄₂ ton
roller, one 14¹⁄₂-ton roller, one 17-ton roller, and one 25-ton roller;
this latter not being much used, as it was found to be too heavy.

The average gross cost per annum of necessary repairs to the rollers,
other than those which could be effected by the men in charge of it,
amounted to 35_l._ 12_s._ The number of men employed to attend to the
roller and cost of labour per day varied considerably, from one case
(South Shields) where “one engine-man at 26_s._ per week, and an old
scavenger with the flag” were found to be sufficient; to another
(Gloucester) where the cost per day is stated as follows: “one man works
the engine at 5_s._ per day, one boy with signal flag, 1_s._ 8_d._, two
men spreading gravel or sand at 3_s._, two men watering and sweeping to
keep water from running off in channels.”

Some of the older rollers require a steersman as well as a driver, and
the Locomotives Amendment Act requires two men with flags, but this is
seldom really necessary. The sweepers, spreaders and sprinklers should
be taken as irrespective of the actual cost of the roller, which may
therefore be assumed to be the wages of the engine-man, say 5_s._ per
diem, and a boy or old man with a flag at 2_s._, thus making a total for
labour of 7_s._ per diem.

The fuel that is consumed by a 15-ton roller seems to be from 3 to 5
cwt. of coke per diem, common gas coke being generally used, though
steam coal would no doubt answer equally well, some of the smokeless
Welsh descriptions being of course necessary.

With regard to the question “When not used for rolling roads, to what
other use (if any) do you put the engine power?” there are not many
towns that use the machine for any other purpose than rolling, but the
following uses may be enumerated to which the machines have been
applied:--Driving a stone-breaker, a mortar-mill, a saw-bench, a
chaff-cutting machine, a bean-crusher, etc. It has also been used in
connection with pumping, and to produce the necessary power for the
electric light, and it is frequently employed as a traction engine.

The driving rollers usually have provision by which spikes may be fitted
into holes in their faces, in order that they may be used for lifting or
chequering roads. These, however, apparently do not answer; the working
of a machine in this manner is said to shake and strain it considerably,
and the holes in the rollers, which are plugged with wood when not in
use, are objectionable, as these plugs wear out and the road metal gets
into the holes, and the surface of the road is picked up as the rolling
proceeds; besides this, the spikes seem to have no effect unless the
surface of the roadway being operated upon is soft.

With reference to the use of binding material, the most commonly used
and that which receives most favour is road grit or scrapings,[44] sharp
sand is also employed, as well as gravel if clean, and also stone
chippings and screenings; these should be of the same material of which
the road is made, if possible, and no doubt _newly_ constructed roads
require more care in the binding material than simple repairs. The
steepest gradient upon which a roller will act appears to be 1 in 9 in
Blackburn, with a 15-ton roller, but this must require a very heavy
pressure of steam, and 1 in 14 seems to be a gradient that gives no
trouble to roll either up or down; in going down hill, of course it is a
mere question of sufficient break power.

The number of superficial yards rolled per day must vary extremely with
circumstances: the class of material, the amount of binding and water
used, the gradient and pressure of steam maintained, and the amount of
rolling considered necessary,[45] being amongst the various influences.
From the above returns I find that the number of square yards rolled
varies from 500 to 3000 per diem, the average for 42 towns being 1105
square yards per diem.

The cost per square yard rolled, including all charges, may be assumed
to be between ¹⁄₂_d._ and 1_d._, and the cost of binding material about
3_d._ per square yard. With reference to the necessity of binding
material, the following, facts are interesting.

Mr. Wm. H. Grant, Superintending Engineer of the New York Central Park,
in his report upon the park roads, says:[46] “At the commencement of the
macadam roads, the experiment was tried of rolling and compacting the
stone by a strict adherence to Macadam’s theory, that of carefully
excluding all dirt and foreign material from the stones, and trusting to
the action of the roller and the travel of teams to accomplish the work
of consolidation. The bottom layer of stone was sufficiently compacted
in this way to form and retain, under the action of the rollers (after
the compression had reached about its practical limit) an even and
regular surface; but the top layer, with the use of the heavy roller
loaded to its greatest capacity, it was found impracticable to solidify
and reduce to such a surface as would prevent the stones from loosening
and being displaced by the action of waggon-wheels and horses’ feet. No
amount of rolling was sufficient to produce a thorough binding effect
upon the stones or to cause such a mechanical union and adjustment of
their sides and angles together, as to enable them mutually to assist
each other in resisting displacement. The rolling was persisted in with
the roller adjusted to different weights up to the maximum load (12
tons) until it was apparent that the opposite effect from that intended
was being produced. The stones became rounded by the excessive attrition
they were subjected to, their more angular parts wearing away, and the
weaker and smaller ones being crushed.”

“The experiment was not pushed beyond this point. It was conclusively
shown, that broken stones of the ordinary sizes, and of the very best
quality for wear and durability, with the greatest care and attention to
all the necessary conditions of rolling and compression, would not
consolidate in the effectual manner required for the surface of a road
while entirely isolated from and independent of other substances. The
utmost efforts to compress and solidify them while in this condition
after a certain limit had been reached, were unavailing.”

From the foregoing it is very evident that some description of binding
material is essential in making a road under a roller. Where traffic is
allowed to consolidate a road it is different, as then the stones are
knocked about and are sufficiently abraded against each other to form a
binding material for themselves. Too much binding material or too much
water should not be used in forming a road with a steam roller. It is
unfortunately frequently the case that a road is made quickly only to go
to pieces with the traffic in a few weeks. The surface of a
well-constructed macadamised roadway should after being rolled look
almost like an encaustic pavement. If there is too much binding material
in the joints of the stones, the first heavy rain washes it out and the
surface of the roadway quickly goes to pieces.

The following description of the manner in which it is recommended that
the roller should be applied is taken from an excellent little pamphlet
on Steam Road Rolling, by Messrs. Aveling and Porter, the well-known
makers of steam-rollers, and although local circumstances must guide the
surveyor in all his works, the particulars may be of use:--

“In the best practice the roadway is excavated, graded, and properly
formed to a depth of 14 inches from the level of the gutters, with a
cross section conforming to the cross section of the road when finished;
it is then thoroughly and repeatedly rolled with the steam roller, all
depressions being carefully filled and rolled before the stone is put
on. On the bed thus formed and consolidated a layer of stones 8 inches
thick is set by hand, and rammed or settled to place by sledge hammers,
all irregularities of surface being broken off and the interstices
wedged with pieces of stone. The intermediate layer of broken stone, of
a size not exceeding 3 inches in diameter, is then evenly spread to a
depth of 4 inches and thoroughly rolled, and this is followed by rolling
in half-an-inch of sand. The surface layer of stone, broken to a size
not larger than 2 inches diameter, and to a form as nearly cubical as
possible, is then put on to a depth of 3 inches, thoroughly rolled, and
followed as before by sand, also rolled. Finally, a binding composed of
clean, sharp sand is then applied, well watered and most thoroughly
rolled with the steam roller, until the surface becomes firm, compact
and smooth, the superfluous binding material being swept off and
removed.”

And the following account of the method adopted in the United States at
Hartford may also be of interest.[47]

“The surface of the road is excavated to a suitable depth--say, 18
inches; preparing the form for the pavement with the precautions as for
a common pavement; 4 inches of gravel and proper drainage where
required, provided blocks of stone of any irregular shape are selected
for the pavement, of about 7 inches in thickness. The blocks are set by
hand with great care, as closely in contact at their base as
practicable. The surface between the blocks is filled with chippings of
stone carefully laid in. A layer of broken stone, 4 inches thick, is
laid over this pavement. The road-covering thus prepared should be
rolled with the steam roller until the upper layer has become perfectly
compact and consolidated. The second layer, about 3 inches in depth, is
then laid on; a coating of clean coarse gravel, 1¹⁄₂ inch thick, termed
‘binding,’ is spread over the surface, and the whole well rolled as
before, and you have the requisites of a good road--viz., clean, hard,
and even at all seasons. No road should be considered made until it is
completely rolled. A road made in the manner above described, and kept
perfectly clean, hard, and even, with materials of a good tough quality,
would show extremely little wear on the surface; indeed, it has been
found in France to be less than ¹⁄₂ an inch in a year, on a road of
great traffic.”

In the neighbourhood of New York the steam roller is used as follows:--

Two and a half inches of trap rock is laid and lightly rolled until the
stones have become a little compacted, then coarse screenings are added,
and it is again rolled; after this a layer of about 2 inches of stones
are added and rolled with coarse screenings as before. Fine screenings
or stone dust is then applied, and the roadway is then rolled until
every interstice is filled up; it is then well watered and again rolled.

With reference to the employment of the steam roller in repairs of
roads, the following description is given of the method adopted by the
Surveyor to the Tottenham Local Board, near London.[48]

“When a road becomes so full of holes or so worn as to require coating
throughout its entire length and width, it should be hacked completely
over and raked into a segmental form in its transverse section to remove
irregularities, and so that the road may have a fall from the crown to
the channel of not less than one inch to a yard. It should then be
coated with stone broken as nearly cubical as possible and to an uniform
gauge. When spread it should be slightly coated with gravel screenings,
or the grit sweepings from the roads, which are equally suitable for the
purpose when in proper condition. The road should then be watered and
rolled, beginning with the road at the channels, and ending at the crown
of the road, until a smooth surface is obtained, more stones being added
to fill up any inequalities that may exist, until the whole is
consolidated. By constantly sweeping the grit from the sides to the
crown of the road as the roller passes over, every stone is thoroughly
grouted into its bed.”

Mr. R. Read, the Surveyor of Gloucester, says:[49] “The road should be
thoroughly well lifted and the metalling spread in three-inch layers
evenly, and rolled once or twice before the gravel or other binding
material is spread; then spread gravel or sand evenly and well watered
with fine distributor until the stone is entirely covered, and the sand
does not adhere to the roller. Dam up the road channels to prevent water
and sand running off into sewers and let men scoop up the water, and
throw it back on the road, as it collects in the gutters.”

In all cases the sides should be rolled first to such a degree of
firmness that when the roller passes over the centre or crown of road,
its weight, which tends to spread the metal or make it work off towards
the sides, may be resisted by their consolidation.

With reference to the effect of the weight of steam road rollers upon
roadways, it may be well here to compare that of a 15-ton roller with
other burdens that a road has to bear, taking each case at per inch of
width of tire.

An ordinary loaded two-wheeled cart presses with a weight of about 9
cwt. per inch width of tire, a loaded wagon about 7¹⁄₂ cwt., a 9-ton
traction engine about 3³⁄₄ cwt., and a 15-ton steam road roller about
3¹⁄₂ cwt. So that as far as the surface of the roadway is concerned, a
roller affects it the least of any of the above loads.

It has, however, been found that where rollers of more weight than 15
tons are used,[50] not only are they unwieldy, but, from their great
weight, the solidity of the foundation of the roadway may be interfered
with, and also there is great danger of damaging gas or water mains and
services, besides any cellars that may be constructed under the roadway.

The steam rollers which are principally used in this country, are those
manufactured by Messrs. Aveling and Porter, and those by Messrs. Green
and Sons, drawings of both of which are here represented.

[Illustration: MESSRS. AVELING AND PORTER’S 15-TON STEAM ROAD ROLLER.]

[Illustration: MESSRS. GREEN AND SON’S 15-TON STEAM ROAD ROLLER AND
TRACTION ENGINE COMBINED.]

In Paris the Gellerat steam roller is used, and another is also known,
which is manufactured by Messrs. Morland and Sons.

A 15-ton steam roller costs about 650_l._ in the first place, the cost
of working it &c., has been given in the early pages of this chapter.

The advantages of steam road rolling may be summed up as follows:--

(1.) The saving of wear and tear to vehicles and horses. Roads should be
made _for_ the traffic, and not _by_ it.[51]

(2.) Economy; as it is said that a saving of from 30 to 50 per cent. is
effected by reason of the roads being better made thus obviating the
necessity for such frequent sweeping and scraping.

(3.) The roads can be made or repaired at any season of the year.

(4.) The avoidance of cruelty to horses, cattle, and sheep, as in the
case of newly metalled unrolled roads.

(5.) A saving of road metal. (_a_) Because it need not be broken so
small. (_b_) Because there are no loose stones to be kicked about and
lost. (_c_) Because there is no abrasion of the stones, only one surface
of the stone being exposed. (_d_) Because no ruts can be formed in which
water can lie to rot the stone. (_e_) Because a thinner coating of metal
can be employed.

(6.) The roller can be advantageously used for other purposes.

(7.) Rolled streets have a better appearance, they are easier of traffic
as having more evenness of surface and superior hardness, and it is
contended that if steam rollers were more general there would not be
such an outcry for other descriptions of pavement for roadways.

(8.) The steam roller soon finds out the good from the bad metal for
roads, it is also contended that it also does this with respect to the
gas and water mains, the latter, however may be looked upon as a rather
doubtful advantage.

(9.) The avoidance of the necessity of the continued employment of men
raking the metal into the ruts.

In Mr. Paget’s valuable little pamphlet upon the subject of steam
rolling[52] may be found the following remarks:--

“One of the main advantages attending the rolling of roads by
steam-power, consists in the diminished proportion of mud or soluble
matter which is then incorporated in the structure of the road surface.
If the surface of an ordinary road that has not been rolled is broken up
and the material washed, it is found that as much as half of it is
soluble matter, mud, dirt, and very fine sand; the stones, having only
been thrown loosely upon the road, have lain so long before becoming
consolidated by the traffic, and have undergone in the meantime such
extensive abrasion that the proportion of mud, dirt, and pulverised
material in the metalling is increased to that extent, and the stones
are really only stuck together by the mud. This accounts for the fact
that although an unrolled macadamised road may indeed, after long use,
have a surface that is pretty good and hard in dry weather, and may
offer then a very slight resistance to traction, yet it will quickly
become soft and muddy when there is any rain. By the employment,
however, of a steam roller upon the newly-laid metalling of a
macadamised road the stones are rolled in and well bedded at once, and
the surface is thus consolidated into a sort of stone felt, capable of
resisting most effectually the action of ordinary traffic, and
containing the smallest quantity of soluble matter to form mud in wet
weather.”

Having given the advantages of steam road rolling, I will now proceed to
give the disadvantages.

(1.) The first cost; this to a small borough or town is often the great
stumbling block. It is a pity that two or three of them could not join,
and procure one between them at joint cost, thus avoiding the
individually heavy burden.

(2.) The risk of damage to gas and water mains and services; or even of
cellars under the streets in some of the older towns.

(3.) The interference to traffic whilst the roller is at work; the
result is generally unsatisfactory if, to avoid this, the machine is
worked during the night.

(4.) The noise and smoke.

(5.) The risk of frightening horses.

(6.) If too heavy a roller is used, the foundation of the roadway may be
injured or the metal may be crushed instead of bedded.

(7.) The necessity of using so much binding material and water.

Before closing this chapter it will be necessary to say a few words upon
rollers drawn by horses.

These are always unsatisfactory: they are expensive to use, as a large
team of horses and a number of attendants are necessary; they are
difficult to turn, and the horses’ feet displace almost as many stones
as the roller compresses into their beds.

They cannot be of greater weight than 10 tons, even when on the
hydrostatic principle, and they are clumsy and difficult of
manipulation.

If a roller is to be used at all, let it be a steam road roller of the
most modern description, and of the best manufacture.

  [42] _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
  Engineers,’ vol. lviii. p. 95. (The first steam roller was made in the
  year 1864.)

  [43] The first steam roller used in England was, I believe, in the
  year 1872; in Paris about 1864.

  [44] This should be collected and “weathered” so as to get rid of mud
  and any organic matter in it.

  [45] In Paris 3 to 3·75 ton miles of roller are applied to every cubic
  yard of metal; in America 5 ton miles are thought necessary.

  [46] _Vide_ ‘Roads, Streets, and Pavements,’ by Q. A. Gillmore, p. 89.

  [47] _Vide_ Aveling and Porter’s pamphlet on ‘Steam Road Rolling,’ p.
  32.

  [48] _Vide_ Aveling and Porter’s pamphlet on ‘Steam Road Rolling,’ p.
  33.

  [49] _Vide_ ‘The Use of Steam Rollers,’ by A. W. Parry, Reading.

  [50] Some road surveyors contend that for gravelled roads 6-ton
  rollers are heavy enough, for macadam roads 12-ton rollers.

  [51] Traffic in making a roadway is apt to grind off the sharp edges
  and spoil the metal before it is set.

  [52] ‘Report on the Economy of Road Maintenance and Horse Draught
  through Steam Rolling, with special reference to the Metropolis,’ by
  Frederick A. Paget, C.E., etc. etc., London 1870, to which I refer my
  readers for many scientific and useful facts upon this subject.




CHAPTER VIII.

PITCHED PAVEMENTS.


It has been asserted that where a roadway has a traffic exceeding 1000
vehicles per diem, that to maintain it as a macadamised roadway is not
economical.[53] However that may be, it is unquestionable that for very
heavy traffic blocks of hammer-dressed stone, laid upon a concrete or
hard gravel bed, have been in use for a great number of years, and
indeed the Romans, who were great road makers, introduced the system
(the Archaic, as it is sometimes called) into this country more than
2000 years ago; the size of the paving stones was, however, much larger
than modern science finds necessary.

There is no doubt that a roadway paved with granite or whinstone setts,
upon a hard concrete foundation, presents a most enduring pavement,
costing but a few pence per annum in repairs[54] and cleansing, and in
other respects it answers nearly all the requirements of traffic except
in two very important particulars--it becomes very greasy and slippery
under certain conditions of the weather after having been laid any time,
and it is an intolerable nuisance in any great thoroughfare, from the
incessant din and clatter arising from the wheels of vehicles and the
iron shoes of the horses striking upon it; so great is the noise in some
thoroughfares thus paved, that tradesmen are compelled to keep their
doors and windows tightly closed in order that they may be able to
conduct their business, and it is known to injuriously affect the nerves
and health of persons who are obliged to live in the vicinity of such
streets. It is a bad pavement too for horses to travel upon, the jar
upon the legs of the unfortunate animals soon telling upon them.

Great improvements, however, have in recent years been introduced to
correct these faults. The setts are now made very narrow, about 3 inches
in width, or 4 setts to 14 inches including the joints: this gives a
better foothold for the horse, the hoof having but a little way to slip
before being arrested by a joint; it also lessens the noise, and helps
besides to prevent the edges of the stones becoming worn or the pavement
wearing unevenly.

Running the joints with an asphaltic composition instead of ordinary
grouting has also materially conduced to deaden the noise.

Taking the question of cost into account--and cost of this description
of paving, be it remembered, is considerably affected by weight, when
carriage of the stone has to be considered--the following sizes of
stones may be taken as satisfactory.[55]

  Depth       6     to 8 inches
  Width       2¹⁄₂   „ 3   „
  Length      5      „ 9   „

The following table,[56] showing the number of square yards that 1 ton
in weight of different sizes of granite setts will cover, may be of
use, but this must vary with the specific gravity of the stone employed.

  Depth.      Width.         Square yards.
    5  inches × 3 inches covers 4¹⁄₃
    6    „    × 3   „      „    3²⁄₅
    4    „    × 4   „      „    5¹⁄₃
    7    „    × 3   „      „    3

The question of the best class of stones to employ as a paving material
must to a great measure depend upon local circumstances, but it is
important to select such stones as are very hard and durable, but which
will not wear smooth and slippery nor round by reason of the chipping
off of their edges.

Nearly all granites are suitable for this work, but Carnarvonshire
syenite[57] is said to be the best material that can be used, although,
being denser than granite, it is heavier and consequently more
expensive.

At one time large quantities of paving stones were used in London and
Liverpool which were brought from Bombay and China, as ballast for ships
trading between those ports.

Mount Sorrel from Leicestershire and the Welsh stones are said to wear
slippery[58] as well as porphyry, whereas the presence of felspar in the
granite always keeps it rough under traffic.

Of the granites, that from Dalbeattie in Scotland is said to be the
best.

The table on the next page, prepared by Mr. Walker in 1831, showing the
wear of different stones, may be of interest.

TABLE SHOWING THE RESULT OF EXPERIMENTS MADE BY MR. WALKER ON THE WEAR
OF STONES IN 1830-31, A PERIOD OF 17 MONTHS.

  ----------------+-------+---------------+-------+-----------+--------
                  | Super-|               |Loss of|           |
                  | ficial|               | weight| Loss per  |
                  |area in|    Original   |   by  |superficial|Relative
   Name of stone. | feet. |     weight.   |  wear.|   foot.   | losses.
  ----------------+-------+---------------+-------+-----------+--------
                  |       |cwt. qrs.  lbs.|       |           |
  Guernsey        | 4·734 | 7    1   12·75|  4·50 |   0·951   |  1·000
  Herm            | 5·250 | 7    3   24·25|  5·50 |   1·048   |  1·102
  Budle           | 6·336 | 9    0   15·75|  7·75 |   1·223   |  1·286
  Peterhead (blue)| 3·484 | 4    1    7·50|  6·25 |   1·795   |  1·887
  Heytor          | 4·313 | 6    0   15·25|  8·25 |   1·915   |  2·014
  Aberdeen (red)  | 5·375 | 7    2   11·50| 11·50 |   2·139   |  2·249
  Dartmoor        | 4·500 | 6    2   25·0 | 12·50 |   2·778   |  2·921
  Aberdeen (blue) | 4·823 | 6    2   16·0 | 14·75 |   3·058   |  3·216
  ----------------+-------+---------------+-------+-----------+--------

The Aberdeen granite as at present laid in the City of London, 3 inches
wide by 9 inches in depth, has a life of about 15 years.[59] In the City
of Durham whinstone setts of the same width last 17 or 18 years, in
Manchester similar granite setts last 15 to 20 years. On this subject
Mr. Deacon, the then Borough Engineer of Liverpool, has collected some
most valuable information, and I refer my readers to a paper read by him
before the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1879,[60] for a great deal
of useful information on this and other subjects connected with
roadways.

Various methods have been adopted for constructing granite paved
streets, some of which I will proceed to describe.

One of the first really good granite pavements introduced into London
was that known as the “Euston Pavement,” and it was constructed in the
following manner: The foundation was shaped to the intended surface of
the finished roadway; upon this a layer of coarse gravel was spread 4
inches in thickness, this was well rammed,[61] and upon it was spread 4
inches of gravel mixed with a small quantity of chalk to bind it; this
again being well rammed, upon it was placed a similar layer only
composed of finer gravel, and upon this foundation the stones were
placed, being bedded upon about an inch of fine sand. The stones used
were Mount Sorrel granite, which were hammer-dressed and squared, 3
inches in width by 4 inches in depth; they were set close together at
right angles with the lines of the kerb, they were then thoroughly
rammed by the pavior. The whole surface was afterwards covered with
screened gravel which was allowed to find its way into the joints and
thus steady the entire pavement.

The following section will explain this.

[Illustration]

In many cases the foundation is simply formed by shaping the soil to the
required contour, and covering this with 3 or 4 inches of gravel or
cinders, which is afterwards either rammed or consolidated by the
traffic; upon this the setts are placed as closely as possible, the
joints are then filled with fine gravel well worked in with a “cramming
iron,” the whole surface being then covered with a grouting of lime and
sand, which is brushed into the joints with a stumpy broom.[62]

In Leeds, Manchester, Salford, and many other important cities, I
believe the foundations are formed in the manner just described, but of
greater depth, the grouting also is a bituminous mixture, which I will
presently describe, instead of the ordinary lime grouting.

The paved streets of Manchester are proverbial for their excellence,
which is attributable to the manner in which the foundations of the
streets are consolidated by the traffic before any setts are placed on
them; in many cases the old macadamised surface of a street being
utilised as a foundation, this process being almost identical with that
recommended by Sir Henry Parnell fifty years ago.[63]

Where the traffic is heavy, however, a firmer foundation even than this
is necessary, and up to the present time no better foundation has been
introduced than that of good Portland cement concrete. This should be at
least 9 inches in thickness, and be composed of one part of Portland
cement, two parts of clean sharp river sand, and four parts of clean
river ballast, or broken stones, or other suitable material. The surface
of the concrete, after having been placed in position, should be
smoothed over with the shovel, so as to present the proper convexity and
have an even surface for the granite setts to be bedded upon.

Another description of foundation now very extensively used where the
traffic is heavy, is that known as “Bituminous Concrete,” which is made
as follows:

The ground being excavated to the proper depth and contour, broken stone
as for macadam is spread for a depth of 6 or 9 inches; this is then
levelled and thoroughly rolled with a light roller, a boiling mixture of
pitch and tar, or creosote oil is then poured over the whole surface
until every interstice is filled, when a thin layer of small broken
stone is spread upon it, and then well rolled until it consolidates.

It may be well to observe here that in all works involving concrete
foundations and paving in streets, the traffic should be entirely
stopped if at all possible. Streets paved half at a time are never quite
satisfactory, and the concrete should have at least a week to set before
the pavement is placed upon it.

Upon a foundation of either Portland cement or bituminous concrete, the
granite setts themselves should be grouted with a bituminous mixture
instead of cement or lime grouting. This renders the pavement more
impervious to moisture, makes it less noisy, and adds considerably to
its strength; the mode of applying it is nearly similar to that of
ordinary grouting. The setts are placed on about an inch of sand and
well rammed, the boiling mixture is then poured over the whole surface,
which is then covered with a thin coating of small, sharp gravel.

The following table of the proportions necessary for the bituminous
mixture may here be of use.

PROPORTIONS FOR BITUMINOUS MIXTURE.[64]

                                                                Creosote
                                 Pitch.     Tar.      Pitch.      oil.
  For grouting in pavements        1     to  1     or   3     to   1

  For foundations or lower layer   3     to  1     or   3¹⁄₂  to    ¹⁄₂
  of asphalte macadam

  For upper layer of asphalte      2¹⁄₂  to  1¹⁄₂  or   3¹⁄₄  to    ³⁄₄
  macadam and for foot paths

The objections to this method of paving are only temporary: the nuisance
arising from the fumes of the boiling mixture whilst it is being
applied, and the necessity for dry weather to make the operation
successful. Healey’s Patent Pitch Boilers[65] are said to moderate, if
not entirely to do away with the former, and the latter can be arranged
by only doing the work at favourable seasons, or if the worst come to
the worst, to cover the work with tarpaulins raised on trestles.

Before closing this chapter I should like to draw attention to the
question of provision for wheel tracks, or tramways paved with stone,
asphalte, or other hard material, and a track for horses giving a firmer
foot-hold, similar to those so highly spoken of in Milan and other
Italian cities. An excellent description is given of them by Mr. P. le
Neve Foster, Jun., in an appendix to a report on the Application of
Science and Art to Street Paving and Street Cleansing of the Metropolis
(1872).

The roadway where stone tramways are employed cannot be of convex
section; on the contrary, it should be concave, with the channel,
gutter, or water table in the centre. This is in itself an obvious
advantage, and I trust that the question of these tramways may at some
future date receive more attention from English engineers; the great
objection to them in this country being that the smooth tram-track would
be very slippery and apt to throw horses down when passing on and off,
but they have many advantages which should not be passed over without
consideration.[66]

  [53] Birmingham in 1854 had not, I believe, a single mile of paved
  streets; the principal ones are now nearly all paved with granite
  setts, and over 20,000 square yards were so paved in 1880.

  [54] It is said that the cost per annum per square yard of granite
  paved roadways is but 3_d._, whereas the same cost for macadamised
  roadways under the same circumstances is 1_s._ 6_d._

  [55] In Paris after considerable research into the question, the
  engineers of the Ponts et Chausseés, decided that the size of the
  paving stones, which used formerly to be 9 inches square should be 4
  inches wide by 6¹⁄₄ inches long by 6¹⁄₄ inches deep, the stone that is
  used being a grit sandstone, from the forest of Fontainebleu.

  [56] _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
  Engineers,’ vol. lviii. p. 66.

  [57] Syenite is a hard, greenish-grey metamorphic rock, composed
  principally of silica, alumina, and lime, in conjunction with
  magnesia, iron, etc. Its specific gravity is 2·96.

  [58] Mr. Boyle, District Surveyor of Manchester, says: “I would
  caution you against the use of the old blue Penmaenmawr stone as being
  an extremely slippery stone, and one which makes a dangerous
  pavement.” _Vide_ ‘Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and
  Sanitary Engineers,’ vol. iii. p. 58.

  [59] The old granite paving of London used only to last eight years.
  _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,’
  vol. ix. p. 222.

  [60] _Vide_ ‘Street Carriageway Pavements,’ by George Frederick
  Deacon, M. Inst. C.E., ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of
  Civil Engineers,’ vol. lviii. p. 1 _et seq._

  [61] The pavior’s rammer is about 55 lb. in weight, with an iron ring
  at its foot; this is swung with some dexterity between the legs, and
  is allowed to fall with great force upon the earth or stones it is in
  use upon.

  [62] The usual specifications for the Guidet paving blocks (in New
  York) require that they shall be of granite, equal in hardness to the
  Quincy granite, of durable and uniform quality, each measuring not
  less than 3¹⁄₂ nor more than 4¹⁄₂ inches in width on the upper surface
  or face, and not less than 10 nor more than 15 inches in length, and
  not less than 8 nor more than 9 inches in depth. Blocks of 3¹⁄₂ inches
  in width on the face to be not less than 3 inches in width at the
  base; all other blocks to measure on the base not more than 1 inch
  less in width or in length than on the face. The blocks are set
  upright in close contact on their edges in courses, with the longest
  dimensions and the continuous joints running across the street,
  breaking joints lengthwise of the street.

  The ends of the blocks are dressed off so as to give close joints in
  the direction of the draught, while the broad vertical sides of the
  blocks are left rugged or uneven, or with the split rock-face so that
  the continuous joints running across the street are somewhat open.
  _Vide_ ‘Roads, Streets, and Pavements’ by Q. A. Gillmore, p. 157.

  [63] _Vide_ ‘A Treatise on Roads,’ by Sir Henry Parnell, p. 130.

  [64] As these ingredients often vary very much in their constitution,
  the surveyor must use his judgment to a great extent as to these
  proportions.

  [65] These boilers are now much used for such purposes, they hold from
  60 to 500 gallons and are light and portable; the temper of the
  bituminous mixture also remains uniform whilst being drawn off, and
  there is very little evaporation or waste arising from them.

  [66] Since writing the above, the Liverpool and Manchester tram-road
  was designed I believe on this principle.




CHAPTER IX.

WOOD PAVING.


In the year 1843 Mr. Charles Cochrane, the President of the ‘Association
for the promotion of Improved Street Paving, etc.,’ in a paper which he
read before the Institution of Civil Engineers, on the State of the
Streets of the Metropolis, said that there existed at that date 100,000
yards of wood pavement.[67] He further states that it is said to be
slippery, but that he approves of it as the best material hitherto used,
“both as regards its general economy and durability as well as its
facility of traction, and more especially its extreme cleanliness.”

Two years previous to this date, Mr. Edward Lomas condemned wood
pavement as slippery, and recommended granite pavement for horses with
wood tram-tracks for the wheels of vehicles.[68]

Since these dates the question of wood paving has made giant strides,
many companies and private firms having started business as wood
paviors, with many various methods, which they strongly advocate as
being superior to the others; amongst them I will enumerate and describe
the following:


_The Improved Wood Pavement Company._--The ground being consolidated, a
layer of sand is made the basis of the pavement, and assumes the shape
the surface of the street is intended to take. Red-wood boards 1-inch in
thickness are then laid across the roadway, from kerb to kerb, placed
together so as to break joint; boards of the same material and
thickness are then laid longitudinally, and breaking joint in the same
manner.[69] On this foundation red-wood blocks are placed in rows,
taking the same direction as the under flooring.

Between each row of blocks, a strip of wood ³⁄₄ × ³⁄₄ inch is nailed to
the block and flooring, the blocks in all cases breaking joint; the
spaces thus formed between the rows of blocks are then run with a thick
composition which fills all vacant spaces there may be between the strip
and the block, covering the strip about ¹⁄₈ of an inch. Gravel, dried
and sifted through ³⁄₄-inch mesh, is then put in, solidly rammed, and
composition poured in; the pavement is then covered to a depth of ¹⁄₂ an
inch with dried gravel and composition for the purpose of indurating the
surface, and filling the spaces flush with the top of the block, a
slight covering of sand is then spread, when the traffic may immediately
pass over.


_The Asphaltic Wood Pavement Company._--After the ground is properly
prepared, 6 or 9 inches of concrete is laid, on this is laid a bed of
asphalte not less than ¹⁄₂-inch in thickness; then wood blocks 3 by 8 by
5 inches or 3 by 9 by 5 inches, of good, sound, yellow Baltic timber are
laid with joints ¹⁄₂-inch in width, these joints are filled from 2
inches up with heated asphalte, the remaining 3 inches being filled with
a grouting of hydraulic lime, and clean, sharp, fine river grit or sand,
the whole being covered with a top dressing of fine, sharp sand, which
wears in with the traffic.


_Croskey’s Wood Pavement._--Upon a bed of concrete, cross grained planks
were to be placed side by side and be forced together by pressure so as
to form a compact homogeneous surface of wood.[70]


_Lloyd’s Patent Keyed Wood Pavement._--The special feature of this
system is that _Pitch Pine_ blocks are used laid _direct_ upon the
concrete foundation, the blocks being grooved on each side so that the
grouting (composed of Portland cement) shall run in and form a key.


_Harrison’s Wood Pavement._--This system consists of a concrete
foundation, upon which strips of wood 2 inches wide by ¹⁄₂ an inch in
thickness are laid. Upon these, wood blocks 3 inches in breadth are
placed, and then hot asphalte is poured into the joints, which
conglomerates the whole.


_Henson’s Wood Pavement._--The main feature of this patent consists in
placing common felt on the concrete bed, and between the joints of the
wood blocks; thus, it is contended, giving elasticity and allowing for
the expansion and contraction of the blocks. The blocks are also
bevelled on the top and grooved in a particular manner.


_Carey’s Wood Pavement._--In this case the blocks are cut 4 inches wide
by 9 inches long, and 5 or 6 inches deep, according to the traffic;
these blocks are shaped with alternate convex and concave ends, and are
laid on a bed of sand about 2 inches thick, the joints between the
blocks, which have been left about ³⁄₈ inch wide, being filled with a
grouting of lime and sand.


_Messrs. Mowlem and Company’s_ method of laying wood paving is to form a
foundation of concrete, varying in thickness according to the nature of
the subsoil and the traffic; then to pave with blocks of yellow deal, 3
inches wide and 6 or 7 inches deep; the joints, which vary from ³⁄₈ to
¹⁄₂ inch, are filled in with sand and lias lime, and the surface is
afterwards indurated by strewing it with shingle.


_Patent Ligno-Mineral Paving Company._--This company lays claim to the
speciality of using hard woods as well as pine, and that the pine blocks
they employ are preserved or mineralised so as to be more durable than
the wood in its natural state.[71]


_Nicholson’s Wood Pavement._--This is principally in use in the United
States, and consists of rectangular blocks of pine laid upon a close
flooring of pine boards, 1 inch thick, laid lengthwise with the line of
street, their ends resting on similar boards laid transversely from kerb
to kerb, the boards being thoroughly tarred and laid upon a bed of sand.
The joints of the wood blocks are run with an asphaltic mixture, and the
whole surface is finally covered with hot coal tar and sprinkled with
fine sand and gravel.


_Stowe’s Wood Pavement._--This is also American, the blocks resting
directly upon sand or gravel about 6 inches in thickness.[72] “The
blocks are set in courses transversely across the street, so as to break
joint lengthwise of the street, the courses being separated from each
other 1 inch by a continuous course of wooden wedges placed close
together edge to edge, and extending from kerb to kerb. These wedges are
set in the first instance with their tops flush with the top surface of
the blocks. After the whole pavement shall have been well rammed, so as
to give each block a firm bed, the wedges are driven down about 3
inches, and the open joints thus formed above them between the courses
are filled in with a concrete composed of hot coal tar and fine roofing
sand and gravel. The surface of the pavement may then be coated with
coal tar prepared by boiling with pitch, and finished off with a thin
layer of sand.”


_Wood Paving in Norwich._--Mr. P. Marshall, the City Surveyor of
Norwich, states[73] that the wood pavement in that city is “simply laid
on the road formation levelled up with shingle. The blocks are grouted
in with blue lias lime and well rammed down. This makes a splendid road,
and is superior to any portion of the road that has been laid with
concrete. This wood paving, 5 inches deep, laid as described, costs
7_s._ per yard super. We have had some down here now for 2 years, and
have had no settlement whatever. It is a very important matter, for it
makes wood paving possible for country towns.”


_Shiel’s Composite Block Paving._--This pavement consists of composite
blocks 12 inches by 15 inches, cast in iron moulds with two rows of wood
placed at an equal distance from either side and each other, the vacant
spaces being filled with granite broken as for macadam; over all is
poured a boiling composition of pitch, chalk, and sand. The blocks are
thus treated at the works, and are, when cool, taken to the street, laid
on a concrete foundation, and grouted with cement grouting.


_Prosser’s Wood Pavement._--This is composed of blocks sawn at an angle
of 60°, the grain of the wood running in the same direction. Each end of
the block rests on the other, transversely to line of street. Between
the rows of blocks a plank, the same depth as the blocks, but with the
grain of the wood horizontal, is placed. The blocks, which on one side
of the plank lean in an opposite direction to those on the other, are
secured or dowelled together by wooden pins running through the plank
and piercing the blocks about an inch.

In Chicago, U.S.A., cedar blocks 6 inches square, set on a composition
of tar and gravel, are used, and are said to make a very durable
pavement.

The following sanitary objections to wood as a material for pavements
are made in the Report on the Application of Science and Art to Street
Paving and Street Cleansing of the Metropolis (1872) page 17.

“The General Board of Health set aside wood as an ineligible material
for this amongst other reasons, that street surfaces ought to be
impermeable; and for roads of light traffic and cheap construction, they
looked to modifications of macadam, with bituminous binders of mineral
tar. Since then wood has been reproduced for the purpose, and strongly
pressed in improved forms for trial. It certainly offers the advantage
of a great gain in noiselessness over granite, more especially from the
horses’ feet, though with some disadvantage from a dead rumble and
vibration; and further it has the advantage of being more available than
smooth pavements for inclines. But hygienists object to its use on
grounds which, in the absence of sanitary science, are overlooked, but
which it is important to particularise as showing the dangerous state of
ignorance and incompetency of the authorities by whom they are not
entertained or are disregarded.”

The sum total of these charges against wood as a pavement consists in
the following: “Wood is porous, it is composed of bundles of fibres, it
absorbs and retains wet, foul wet especially.” Why _foul_ wet should be
absorbed more than ordinary wet does not transpire.

There is no doubt that wood in its natural state does absorb a large
quantity of water,[74] but this can be avoided in wood paving by
preserving the wood of which it is composed by one of the following
processes.

  (1) Burnetising   Chloride of zinc is used in this process.
  (2) Kyanising     Corrosive sublimate is used.
  (3) Renwickising  Boiling in coal tar.
  (4) Boucherising  Sulphate of copper is used.
  (5) Bethelising   Creosote heated to 200° F. is used.
  (6) Seelyising    Creosote is also used, the wood being first boiled.
  (7) Hayfordising  Creosote is also used, wood being unseasoned.

The fibres of the wood are also compressed, and no open joints between
the blocks are permitted, by paving the blocks transversely, with butt
joints closely packed together, and by filling the cross joints with an
asphaltic or other impervious grouting.

Wood paving should, however, be laid in streets with moderate traffic,
and plenty of sun and air. In confined spaces such as courts, it soon
rots and becomes a source of much unhealthiness.[75]

Many reports have been from time to time made on the advantages and
disadvantages of wood paving, and much has been said and written upon
the subject, so that I will only touch upon some of the principal
questions at issue.

The first of importance is that of durability, and although the life of
a hard wood constantly exposed to attrition is amazing, as may be seen
on the stairs of the Metropolitan Railway Stations, and in many cog
wheels of old machinery, still some diversity of opinion exists as to
what may be fairly put down as the wear per annum of the surface of a
street paved with wood blocks.

It must be remembered that to arrive at any fixed ratio of wear, a
standard of traffic should be fixed; but this unfortunately has not
hitherto been done, so that the results of observations are bound to
differ considerably. It must also not be lost sight of that the reason
of excessive wear in a wood pavement generally arises from wide joints
being the means of causing the edges of the blocks to abrade and become
worn.

Mr. D. T. Hope, in a paper he laid before the Scottish Society of Arts,
upon some most careful investigations he had made on this subject, gives
the wear as ¹⁄₈ of an inch in 18 months on blocks laid with vertical
fibre, which he proved was the best manner of laying them to ensure the
longest life.

Mr. Deacon estimated the wear at from 1³⁄₈ inch to 2⁵⁄₁₆ inches per
annum.[76]

Mr. Copland estimated the wear at ³⁄₁₆ of an inch per annum.[77]

Mr. Howorth estimates the life of wood paving at 25 years per inch of
wood, if an absolutely uniform quality of wood fibre could be
assumed.[78]

Mr. Haywood says,[79] “Wood pavements with repairs have in this City
(London) had a life varying from 6 to 19 years, and that with repairs,
an average life of about 10 years may be obtained.”

The life of wood is no doubt extended by being preserved by one of the
processes I have enumerated, but as its life may be taken as an average
of 8 to 10 years, and as the blocks are bound to wear unevenly, they
should be made as shallow as is consistent with stability; as it is an
undisputed fact that the foundation of a roadway is the important
carrier of the traffic, the surface material, of whatever it may be
constructed, only acting as a skin to preserve it. If the blocks are too
thick, unnecessary capital is locked up.

Wood pavement was laid in Sunderland[80] in 1859 with strips of
creosoted red pine, creosoted beech wood, and unpreserved oak, the bulk
of the paving being unpreserved red deal, and this was replaced in 1867.

In 1877, on renewing the pavement, it was found that the creosoted wood
suffered less from wear and tear than the unpreserved, so the whole was
done with creosoted red pine, the original strip of creosoted red pine
was left untouched, the strip of oak was turned, and the beech was
merely raised; and there is no doubt that the best wood pavement is that
which can be constructed in the simplest manner, as for instance deal
blocks 4 or 5 inches deep, laid with a close joint upon a Portland
cement concrete bed, the blocks being well grouted in with Portland
cement grouting, their surface being afterwards sprinkled or strewn with
sand or sharp gravel.

The woods employed for paving are beech and oak, both of which are said
to be too slippery, elm, which is not durable, pitch pine and Baltic
fir. Memel and Dantzic timber is better than Riga, the best wood for the
purpose being said to be Wyborg or St. Petersburgh red deals.

All sappy wood must be at once rejected as unsuitable. This is a great
objection to creosoting or other preserving processes, as it hides
defects in the wood.

The advantages of wood paving may be summed up as follows:--

(1.) It is the quietest of all known pavements, wheels make scarcely any
noise upon it and there is no clatter of horses’ hoofs.

(2.) It is much safer than either asphalte or granite pavements for
horses travelling upon it and if a horse falls he can rise more easily.

(3.) The traction necessary upon it, though slightly greater than upon
asphalte, is compensated for by the better foothold given to horses.

(4.) It is clean. If well constructed there should be no mud made upon
it; all that appears upon its surface should arise either from its being
imported upon it, or from the gravel with which it is sometimes
necessary to dress the surface.

(5.) It presents a uniform and slight elasticity, which is of great
benefit to vehicles passing over it.

(6.) It may be laid on a gradient of 1 in 20 with safety to the traffic.

The principal objections to wood as a paving are:--

(1.) It is said to absorb moisture and to smell offensively, but this
has often been refuted.[81] (2.) It is said to be difficult to cleanse
without the aid of water, as dirt adheres to the wood, and lingers in
the joints.

(3.) It is not easy to open it or repair it, for the purposes of gas and
water pipes, etc., and rather a large surface has to be removed for this
purpose, and it has to be left a little time after repairs before
traffic is again allowed on it.

(4.) The wood swells if wet, and cases are on record of the side kerbs
of streets being raised, and lamp posts thrown down, by the pressure of
the wood thus swelling.[82]

With regard to the cost of wood paving. This must vary in different
localities, according to the value of labour, of materials, and in the
manner in which the work is done.

The practice of most of the companies engaged in this class of work is
to make a fixed charge per square yard for the pavement, including the
concrete but excluding the excavation, and they also guarantee to keep
the pavement in repair free of charge for one or two years, and then
for so many years after, at so much per yard per annum.

About 14_s._ per square yard is generally the first charge for
constructing, and 1_s._ per square yard is the annual charge for
maintenance.

Upon the subject of cost the following tables[83] may be useful.

TABLE SHOWING THE ACTUAL DURATION AND COST OF CERTAIN WOOD PAVEMENTS IN
THE CITY OF LONDON.

  -----------+----------+----------+-----------+-----------+-----------
             |          |          |           | Total Cost|  Average
             |          |          | First Cost| of Repairs|   Cost
             |          |          |     per   | per Square| per Square
             |Date when |          |   Square  |Yard during|  Yard per
   Situation.|laid New. |   Life.  |    Yard.  |   Life.   |   Annum.
  -----------+----------+----------+-----------+-----------+-----------
             |          |Yrs. Mths.|£ _s._ _d._|£ _s._ _d._|£ _s._ _d._
  Cornhill   |May, 1855 | 10    2  |0  12   2  |0  17  4¹⁄₂|0  2  11
             |July, 1865|  6    8  |0  11   6  |0   8  9³⁄₄|0  3   0¹⁄₂
             |          |          |           |           |
  Gracechurch|Nov. 1853 | 11    7  |0  12   8  |0  17  1¹⁄₂|0  2   6³⁄₄
  Street     |June, 1865|  6    0  |0  11   6  |0   6 11   |0  3   0³⁄₄
             |          |          |           |           |
  Lombard    |May, 1851 |  9    4  |0   9   6  |0   6  0   |0  1   7³⁄₄
  Street     |Sept. 1860| 10    7  |0   9   2  |1   0  2   |0  2   9
             |          |          |           |           |
  Lothbury   |May, 1854 | 12    3  |0  12   6  |1   8  4³⁄₄|0  3   4
             |Aug. 1866 |  6    1  |0  12   6  |0   3  5³⁄₄|0  2   7¹⁄₂
             |          |          |           |           |
  Mincing    |July, 1841| 19    1  |0  14   4  |0  13  4   |0  1   5¹⁄₄
  Lane       |Aug. 1860 | 13    0  |0   9   2  |1   2  6³⁄₄|0  2   5¹⁄₄
             |          |          |           |           |
  Bartholomew|May, 1854 | 12    3  |0  12   6  |0  17  5³⁄₄|0  2   5¹⁄₄
  Lane       |Aug. 1866 |  5    5  |0  12   6  |0   3 11¹⁄₄|0  3   0¹⁄₄
  -----------+----------+----------+-----------+-----------+-----------
  Foundations are included, but no excavation.

TABLE SHOWING FIRST COST, AND TENDERED COST PER ANNUM FOR MAINTAINING
CERTAIN WOOD CARRIAGEWAY PAVEMENTS IN THE CITY OF LONDON.

  -----------------+----------+-------------+------------+------------+
                   |          |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |Years to be |            |
                   |          |             | maintained | First Cost |
                   | Date when|   Name of   |     by     |    per     |
      Situation.   |   Laid.  | Contractor. |Contractor. |Square Yard.|
  -----------------+----------+-------------+------------+------------+
                   |          |             |            | £ _s._ _d._|
  King William     |Feb. 1873 |Improved Wood|     16     | 0  18   0  |
  Street           |          | Paving Co.  |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
  Ludgate Hill     |Nov. 1873 |    Ditto    |     16     | 0  18   0  |
                   |          |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
  Portions of Great|          |             |            |            |
  Tower Street and |Sept. 1873|    Ditto    |     16     | 0  16   0  |
                   |          |             |            |            |
  Seething Lane    |          |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
  Bartholomew Lane |Jan. 1872 |    Carey    |No agreement| 0  12   6  |
                   |          |             |            |            |
      Ditto        |Dec. 1871 |Improved Wood|      3     | 0  16   0  |
                   |          | Paving Co.  |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
  Duke Street      |May, 1873 |  Mowlem and |   [84]5    | 0  15   0  |
                   |          |     Co.     |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
  Houndsditch      |  Not yet |    Ditto    |   [84]7    | 0  17   0  |
                   |   laid   |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
      Ditto        |  Ditto   |    Carey    |   [84]7    | 0  13   6  |
                   |          |             |            |            |
                   |          |             |            |            |
  -----------------+----------+-------------+------------+------------+

  -----------------+------------------------+------------+------------
                   |                        | Total Cost |
                   |                        |of Pavements|
                   |                        |   during   |
                   |    Agreed Cost of      |  Contract  |Average Cost
                   |    maintenance per     |   Term,    | per Square
                   |  Square Yard for the   | per Square |  Yard per
      Situation.   |     Contract Term.     |    Yard.   |   Annum.
  -----------------+------------------------+------------+------------
                   |                        | £ _s._ _d._| £ _s._ _d._
  King William     | 1 year free            | 2   0   6  | 0  2  6¹⁄₄
  Street           |15 years at 1_s._ 6_d._ |            |
                   |   = 1_l._ 2_s._ 6_d._  |            |
                   |                        |            |
  Ludgate Hill     | 1 year free            | 2   0   6  | 0  2  6¹⁄₄
                   |15 years at 1_s._ 6_d._ |            |
                   |   = 1_l._ 2_s._ 6_d._  |            |
                   |                        |            |
  Portions of Great| 1 year free            | 1  14   9  | 0  2  2
  Tower Street and |15 years at 1_s._ 3_d._ |            |
                   |   = 18_s._ 9_d._       |            |
  Seething Lane    |                        |            |
                   |                        |            |
  Bartholomew Lane |          ----          |    ----    |    ----
                   |                        |            |
      Ditto        |  3 years free          | 0  16   0  |    ----
                   |                        |            |
                   |                        |            |
  Duke Street      | 2 years free           |{
                   | 3 years at 1_s._       |{
                   |   = 3_s._              |{
                   |                        |{These pavements
  Houndsditch      | 2 years free           |{will no doubt last
                   | 5 years at 9_d._       |{some years longer
                   |   = 3_s._ 9_d._        |{than the contract
                   |                        |{term of maintenance.
      Ditto        | 2 years free           |{
                   | 5 years at 1_s._       |{
                   |   = 5_s._              |{
  -----------------+------------------------+-------------------------
  In the wood pavements the cost of the foundation is included, but no
  excavation.
  The pavements at the end of each financial year are to be in a good
  sound condition.

The following table[85] is also given as showing the comparative cost
of wood paving with macadam and bituminous concrete paving in
Liverpool.

  ----------+--------+----------------------------+-----------+---------
            |        |      Deductions from       |           | Sinking
            |        |  First Cost to determine   |Interest on|  Fund
            |Original|      Cost of Renewal.      | Original  |invested
            |Cost per+-------------+--------------+  Cost at  |at 3
     Des-   | Square |   Cost of   |Allowances for| 4¹⁄₂ per  |per
   cription | Yard at| Foundation  |old Materials | cent. per |cent.
      of    | present|not requiring|   at date    |Square Yard|Compound
   Pavement.| prices.|  renewal.   |  of renewal. |per Annum. |Interest.
  ----------+--------+-------------+--------------+-----------+---------
            | _s. d._|  _s.   d._  |   _s.  d._   |    _d._   |   _d._
    No. 6.  |        |             |              |           |
  Bituminous|        |             |              |           |
  Concrete  | 3   9  |     Nil     |      Nil     |    2·0    |   Nil
  Pavement  |        |             |              |           |
            |        |             |              |           |
    No. 7.  |        |             |              |           |
  Wood      |15   1·5|   2    0    |      Nil     |    7·5    |   4·3
  Pavement  |        |             |              |           |
            |        |             |              |           |
    No. 8.  |        |             |              |           |
  Macadam   | 6   9  |     Nil     |      Nil     |    3·4    |   Nil
  Pavement  |        |             |              |           |
  ----------+--------+-------------+--------------+-----------+---------

  ----------+-----------+----------+----------+---------
            |           |          |          |
            |           |          |          |
            |           |          |          |
            |           |          |          | Total
     Des-   |Maintenance|Scavenging|Gravelling| Annual
   cription |per Square |per Square|per Square|Cost per
      of    | Yard per  | Yard per | Yard per | Square
   Pavement.|  Annum.   |  Annum.  |  Annum.  |  Yard.
  ----------+-----------+----------+----------+---------
            | _s._ _d._ |    _d._  |    _d._  |_s._ _d._
    No. 6.  |           |          |          |
  Bituminous|           |          |          |
  Concrete  |  0    9   |    2·4   |    ..    | 1    1·4
  Pavement  |           |          |          |
            |           |          |          |
    No. 7.  |           |          |          |
  Wood      |  0    1·0 |    2·7   |    5·0   | 1    8·5
  Pavement  |           |          |          |
            |           |          |          |
    No. 8.  |           |          |          |
  Macadam   |  1    0   |    8·0   |    Nil   | 1   11·4
  Pavement  |           |          |          |
  ----------+-----------+----------+----------+---------

In concluding this chapter upon wood paving, I will give a specimen
specification for work of this description.


_Excavation._--Excavate the ground to a depth of -- inches below the
level of the proposed finished surface of the roadway.[86] The formation
surface thus excavated must be well watered and rolled or punned if
found necessary, and any soft or made earth removed to such a depth as
may be found to be sufficient.[87]


_Foundation._--Upon the excavated formation surface a bed -- inches
thick of concrete is to be laid, composed of one part of good approved
Portland cement to two of fine, sharp river sand, and three of clean
river ballast or broken stone. The concrete to be finished off with an
even and smooth top surface conforming with the contour line of proposed
finished roadway.


_Wood Blocks._--Upon the concrete thus laid, and after it has
sufficiently set, wood blocks are to be laid.[88] These blocks must be
of the best description of Baltic red timber[89] (or such other timber
as shall be specified), sound and thoroughly well seasoned, free from
all sap, shakes, large and loose knots or other defects, and any that
may be rejected by the surveyor as unfitted for the work shall be at
once removed from the works or broken up. The blocks must not be less
than 6 inches or more than 12 inches in length by 3 inches in width and
6 inches in depth, they are to be carefully laid with the fibre of the
wood placed vertically, their ends must butt with close joints to each
other, and each course must be kept ³⁄₈ of an inch apart by means of
wooden laths, which are afterwards removed.


_Joints._--The joints are then to be carefully run with a grouting
composed of one part of best approved Portland cement to two parts of
fine, sharp, clean river sand. (In some cases a hot bituminous mixture
or asphalte is run between the joints as a grouting.)


_Top Dressing._--The whole surface of the pavement is then to be spread
with a coating, at least ¹⁄₂-inch in thickness, of fine sharp gravel or
chippings.

The following heads of general conditions under such a contract may also
be useful.

Alteration of gullies, sewer man-holes etc., will be done at the expense
of the sanitary authority.

Contractor must make good at once any damage caused to gas or water
mains or services--time penalty for delay.

Maintenance of work after completion for a specified time.

Power must be reserved to surveyor to suspend work during bad weather or
from other causes.

Heavy time penalties for non-completion of contract by a certain date.

Payments to be made to contractor on surveyor’s certificate, up to 80
per cent. of whole contract, remaining 20 per cent. to be paid at end of
(say) 2 years after completion.

With the above specimen specification I conclude the chapter on Wood
Paving.

  [67] The first wood pavement laid in London was in front of the Old
  Bailey, in 1839.

  [68] _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
  Engineers,’ vol. i. p. 131.

  [69] This specification is the company’s own, as advertised when they
  first began business; for many reasons the boards have since been
  discontinued, and other alterations introduced into the system.

  [70] I am unable to ascertain if this plan has ever been tried
  anywhere.

  [71] It is also affirmed by the Borough Surveyor of Sunderland that
  this process dispenses with watering. _Vide_ ‘Proceedings of the
  Association of Municipal and Sanitary Engineers and Surveyors,’ vol.
  iii. p. 72.

  [72] _Vide_ ‘A Practical Treatise on Roads, Streets, and Pavements,’
  by Q. A. Gillmore, p. 166, which see also for a good account of wood
  pavements in the United States.

  [73] _Vide_ ‘Wood Pavements,’ by Henry Allnutt, 1880, p. 22.

  [74] The power of absorbing water by wood varies from 9·37 to 174·86
  per cent. in dry wood. In its ordinary state the power varies from
  4·36 to 150·64 per cent. The quantity of water contained in wood in
  its natural state varies from 4·61 to 13·56 per cent. _Vide_ ‘Minutes
  of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,’ vol. lvi. p.
  300.

  [75] _Vide_ ‘Roads and Roadways,’ by George Waller Wilcocks, 1879, p.
  34.

  [76] _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
  Engineers,’ vol. lviii. p. 82.

  [77] _Ibid_, vol. lx. p. 293.

  [78] _Ibid_, vol. lviii. p. 45.

  [79] ‘Report upon Asphalte and Wood Pavements,’ by William Haywood,
  (1874) p. 44.

  [80] See ‘Paper on Wood Pavements,’ by R. S. Rounthwaite, Boro’
  Surveyor, Sunderland, ‘Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and
  Sanitary Engineers and Surveyors,’ vol. vii. p. 48.

  [81] The surveyor of the parish of St. George’s Hanover Square,
  London, says, “My experience of wood, and I have laid down 25,000
  yards, is that it is perfectly free from smells, even on a cab rank.”
  Report of a Committee of the Paddington Vestry on Wood and other
  Pavements (1878) p. 30.

  [82] Mr. Allnutt says on this: “As to the swelling of the wood, it has
  been remarked that even brick walls have been forced out. We do not
  see what provision can be made for this; but leaving the channel by
  the kerb stone for the last work may relieve the lateral pressure, and
  perhaps it would be as well for the blocks not to be so dry when being
  laid down.” _Vide_ ‘Wood Pavement as carried out on Kensington High
  Road, Chelsea, etc.’ by Henry Allnutt (1880) p. 15.

  [83] _Vide_ ‘Report on Asphalte and Wood Pavements,’ by William
  Haywood, 1874, pp. 38 and 41.

  [84] The Ligno-Mineral Paving Company and the Improved Wood Paving
  Company offered to maintain their pavements, if laid, for terms of ten
  years and fourteen years respectively; their tenders were not
  accepted.

  [85] _Vide_ ‘Paper on Street Carriageway Pavements,’ by G. F. Deacon,
  ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,’ vol.
  lviii. p. 23.

  [86] If the road material thus excavated is macadam, it may be
  screened and used as concrete in the foundation, if approved by the
  surveyor. The granite pitching of crossings, channel gutters, etc.,
  must remain the property of the sanitary authority, as well as the
  surplus macadam.

  [87] It is important to give sufficient notice to gas and water
  companies in order that they may attend to their mains and services
  before the foundations are put in.

  [88] Sometimes about half an inch of fine sand is spread upon the
  surface of the concrete upon which the wood blocks are bedded.

  [89] If the blocks are to be creosoted, the number of pounds of
  creosote that should be absorbed in a cubic foot of the wood should be
  specified; this is generally about 10 lb. of creosote to 1 cubic foot
  of wood.




CHAPTER X.

COMPRESSED ASPHALTE ROADWAYS.


The word asphalte in its generally accepted sense implies a natural rock
consisting of pure carbonate of lime, intimately combined and
impregnated with mineral bitumen in very variable proportions; that used
for roads or footpaths should not contain less than 7 or more than 12
per cent. of bitumen.

The rock when broken takes an irregular fracture without definite
cleavage; it is principally derived from Val de Travers, Seyssel,
Sicily, Chieti, Auvergne, Lobsann, and Limmer. Its grain should be
regular and homogeneous, the finer the grain the better.[90]

When exposed to the atmosphere asphalte gradually assumes a grey tint,
by reason of the bitumen evaporating from the surface leaving a thin
film of limestone behind. The stone is usually taken from open quarries,
but at Val de Travers shafts are sunk and the general treatment is
similar to a coal mine.

Bitumen, it must be borne in mind, is itself a mineral product found in
Trinidad and some other places; it is composed of carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen.

The weight of a cubic yard of natural asphalte is about 3874 lbs., its
specific gravity is 2·114, but this of course varies with its percentage
of bitumen.

The following is a test for asphalte given by Mr. Deland in a paper he
read before the Institution of Civil Engineers in the year 1880.[91]

“A specimen of the rock freed from all extraneous matter, having been
pulverised as finely as possible, should be dissolved in sulphurate of
carbon, turpentine, ether or benzine, placed in a glass vessel and
stirred with a glass rod. A dark solution will result, from which will
be precipitated the pulverised limestone. The solution of bitumen should
then be poured off. The dissolvent speedily evaporates, leaving the
constituent parts of the asphalte, each of which should be weighed so as
to determine the exact proportion. The bitumen should be heated in a
lead bath and tested with a porcelain or Baumé thermometer to 428° Fahr.
There will be little loss by evaporation if the bitumen is good, but if
bituminous oil is present the loss will be considerable--gritted mastic
should be heated to 450° Fahr. The limestone should next be examined. If
the powder is white and soft to the touch it is a good component part of
asphalte, but if rough and dirty on being tested with reagents it will
be found to contain iron pyrites, silicates, clay, etc. Some asphaltes
also are of a spongy or hygrometrical nature. Thus, as an analysis which
merely gives so much bitumen and so much limestone may mislead, it is
necessary to know the quality of the limestone and of the bitumen.

“For a good compressed roadway an asphalte composed of pure limestone
and 9 to 10 per cent. of bitumen, non-evaporative at 428° Fahr., is the
most suitable. Asphaltes containing much more than 10 per cent. of
bitumen get soft in summer and wavy, those containing much less have not
sufficient bind for heavy traffic, although asphalte containing 7 per
cent. of bitumen properly heated does well for court yards, as it sets
hard when cold.”

For roadways “compressed” asphalte should be used and not “mastic,”
which is only fitted for footpaths, court-yards, etc. Compressed
asphalte roadways are constructed as follows:

The asphalte rock is first crushed in a “Blake’s” or other suitable
crusher, then pulverised in what is known as a “Carr’s disintegrator,”
until it is reduced to a powder; this powder is then heated up to
between 212° and 250° Fahr. in revolving cylinders and is laid about
2¹⁄₂ inches in thickness upon a concrete foundation previously prepared
for its reception, the powder is carefully raked to the required contour
and then either rolled or punned with iron punners previously heated to
prevent the adhesion of the powder to them.

A roadway thus prepared presents many advantages over macadam, granite
setts or wood, the following passage amply describing one of them:[92]

“An indispensable feature of a weight-carrying pavement must be the
absolute exclusion of water at the surface as nearly as it can be
insured, and in this one respect it cannot be questioned that a surface
like asphalte has no equal, the absorption being so gradual as to be
inappreciable during any possible continuance of moisture.”

In addition to this indisputable fact the advantage of durability is
claimed for asphalte, but this must vary considerably with the quality
of the material and of the work. Mr. Hayward estimates the life of an
asphaltic Val de Travers compressed roadway at 17 years, and it is
claimed for it that it will wear until it becomes quite thin, very heavy
traffic breaking it up when it is worn to about ³⁄₄ of an inch thick.
Another advantage claimed for asphalte is cleanliness, and this is
evidently indisputable, as, being impervious, none but imported mud or
dust can be formed upon it.

In addition to the foregoing the following advantages are also claimed:

Pedestrians can walk on asphaltic roadways as well as on the footways.

It is comparatively noiseless under traffic, though in this case wood
is better, as the clatter of the iron-shod horses’ feet upon asphalte is
very apparent.

It is expeditiously laid, and when repairs are necessary they can easily
be effected; no pavement shows less signs of openings being made in it
for gas and water-pipe repairs than asphalte.

The rapid laying causes less inconvenience to traffic in the streets.

Ease of traction; but here steps in the one great objection to asphalte
as a roadway paving, viz. danger to horses by slipping and falling, of
which I shall say more hereafter.

Cellars and vaults under the streets are kept dry, by reason of its
impermeability to moisture.

Easily cleansed, especially by mechanical sweeping, and snow is easily
removed.

It is very pleasing to the eye, being so uniformly regular and of good
colour.

There is no vibration or concussion in travelling over it, and apart
from the question of safety it is delightful to drive over it.

It is a cool pavement at night; it does not absorb heat during the day,
and consequently none radiates from it after the sun has gone down.[93]

The great objection to asphalte as a material for roadways arises from
the fact that it is extremely slippery when damp,[94] irrespective of
temperature, and this in the climate of England is frequently the case.
The result of this slipperiness is, that not only do horses frequently
fall upon it, but it is also difficult to stop a horse when drawing a
load, thus causing more risk to foot-passengers of being run over, and
straining the horse considerably in its efforts. Again, in thoroughfares
crowded with vehicular traffic, constant stoppages occur, and in
starting again it is painful to witness the struggles of the horses to
keep their footing and overcome the inertia of their load. When a horse
falls he has very great difficulty in rising, but on the other hand,
although he may be strained, a horse never breaks his knees upon this
class of pavement. How far this might be altered if _all_ the streets of
a town were paved with asphalte, is a fair matter for argument, as it is
asserted that horses are very nervous on going from one pavement to
another, and accidents frequently happen in consequence.

The strewing of sand upon asphalte renders it less slippery, but in
addition to the interference of the traffic whilst this is being done,
there are the further objections, of the possible injury of the sand
cutting into the asphalte, the expense of labour and materials, and the
mud caused thereby which has afterwards to be removed. Another plan is
to frequently wash the asphalte with water, but this is expensive and
only of temporary benefit.

Another objection to asphaltic roadways is that they cannot with safety
be constructed of greater gradient than 1 in 60, and it must also be
borne in mind that fine weather is necessary both for the construction
and repairs of a roadway of this description.

Very little smell, and that not of an unpleasant character, arises from
the work when compressed asphalte is being used, the mastic is however
temporarily unpleasant to those who dislike the odour.

With reference to the question of the cost of compressed asphalte for
roadways: it is of course a matter depending upon local circumstances as
to the first cost, but it must be remembered that the compressed
asphalte hitherto laid has been nearly all that of the Val de Travers
Company, who charge a fixed price per square yard for laying according
to thickness required, the distance of the locality from London, and
other local circumstances. With reference to maintenance, this is a
question dependent mainly upon traffic, but here again the company will
undertake to keep in repair at so much per square yard per annum for a
certain number of years.

It would, however, perhaps be a better plan not to enter into such an
agreement, but to arrange for repairs under a schedule of prices, but
this must greatly depend upon the character of the work in the first
place, and other local considerations.

Mr. Ellice Clarke gives the following as the cost of Val de Travers
compressed asphalte.[95]

The cost is reduced to 100,000 tons per annum per yard of width.

  ----+-------------+-----------+-----------+----------+---------+----
      |Original Cost| Interest  |Maintenance|Scavenging|         |
      | per Square  |on original|per Square |per Square|         |
      |    Yard.    |   Cost.   |   Yard.   |  Yard.   |  Total. |
      +-------------+-----------+-----------+----------+---------+
      |  _s._ _d._  |    _d._   |    _d._   |   _d._   |_s._ _d._|
      |   18   0    |     9·7   |     3·6   |    0·4   | 1    1·7|
  ----+-------------+-----------+-----------+----------+---------+----

Nothing is charged for renewal, as the annual sum for maintenance
provides the asphalte in perpetuity.[96]

The following table[97] may here be of use:

TABLE SHOWING THE AGREED COST PER ANNUM OF CERTAIN ASPHALTE CARRIAGEWAY
PAVEMENTS IN THE CITY OF LONDON.

  -----------+------------+--------+----------+-----------------------+
             |            |Years to|  First   |    Agreed Cost of     |
             |            |be main-|   Cost   |     maintenance       |
             |            | tained |   per    |      per Square       |
             |Description | by Con-|  Square  |     Yard for the      |
   Situation.|of Asphalte.|tractor.|   Yard.  |     Contract Term.    |
  -----------+------------+--------+----------+-----------------------+
             |            |        |£ _s.  d._|                       |
  Cheapside  |   Val de   |   17   |0  18  0  | 2 years free          |
  and Poultry|  Travers   |        |          |15 years at 1_s._ 6_d._|
             |(Compressed)|        |          |   = £1 2_s._ 6_d._    |
             |            |        |          |                       |
  Gracechurch|    Ditto   |   17   |0  17  0  | 2 years free          |
  Street     |            |        |          |15 years at 1_s._      |
             |            |        |          |   = 15_s._ 0_d._      |
             |            |        |          |                       |
  Finsbury   |    Ditto   |   17   |0  16  0  | 2 years free          |
  Pavement   |            |        |          |15 years at 9_d._      |
             |            |        |          |   = 11_s._ 3_d._      |
             |            |        |          |                       |
  Moorgate   |    Ditto   |   17   |0  16  0  | 2 years free          |
  Street     |            |        |          |15 years at 9_d._      |
             |            |        |          |   = 11_s._ 3_d._      |
             |            |        |          |                       |
    Ditto    |   Limmer   |   17   |0  16  0  | 2 years free          |
             |  (Mastic)  |        |          |15 years at 9_d._      |
             |            |        |          |   = 11_s._ 3_d._      |
             |            |        |          |                       |
  Lombard    |    Ditto   |   17   |0  16  0  | 2 years free          |
  Street     |            |        |          |15 years at 9_d._      |
             |            |        |          |   = 11_s._ 3_d._      |
             |            |        |          |                       |
  Cornhill   |    Ditto   |   17   |0  15  0  | 2 years free          |
             |            |        |          |15 years at 9_d._      |
             |            |        |          |   = 11_s._ 3_d._      |
             |            |        |          |                       |
  Mincing    |    Ditto   |   17   |0  12  0  | 2 years free          |
  Lane       |            |        |          |15 years at 9_d._      |
             |            |        |          |   = 11_s._ 3_d._      |
  -----------+------------+--------+----------+-----------------------+

  -----------+---------------+------------
             | Total Cost of |
             |   Pavements   |Average Cost
             |during Contract| per Square
             |   Term per    |  Yard per
   Situation.|  Square Yard. |   Annum.
  -----------+---------------+------------
             |  £ _s._ _d._  | £ _s._ _d._
  Cheapside  |  2   0   6    | 0  2  4¹⁄₂
  and Poultry|               |
             |               |
             |               |
  Gracechurch|  1  12   0    | 0 10  1¹⁄₂
  Street     |               |
             |               |
             |               |
  Finsbury   |  1   7   3    | 0  1  7¹⁄₄
  Pavement   |               |
             |               |
             |               |
  Moorgate   |  1   7   3    | 0  1  7¹⁄₄
  Street     |               |
             |               |
             |               |
    Ditto    |  1   7   3    | 0  1  7¹⁄₄
             |               |
             |               |
             |               |
  Lombard    |  1   7   3    | 0  1  7¹⁄₄
  Street     |               |
             |               |
             |               |
  Cornhill   |  1   6   3    | 0  1  6¹⁄₂
             |               |
             |               |
             |               |
  Mincing    |  1   3   3    | 0  1  4¹⁄₂
  Lane       |               |
             |               |
  -----------+---------------+------------

The cost of foundations is included in this table, but their thickness
is not mentioned; the excavation was done for the contractors.

With the one serious objection of slipperiness, compressed asphalte
seems a most suitable material for the surface of a roadway, but that
objection is of considerable weight when we reflect that the great
object of roadways is that of “traffic,” and it is for that purpose they
are constructed; still, in cities where a heavy _business_ traffic is
going on, this class of roadway has so many advantages that where cheap
horses are driven it might be used; where, however, valuable horses are
used for pleasure driving, as in the west end of London and the
corresponding better parts of cities, some other description of roadway
should be maintained.

Mastic asphalte will be described in the chapter on footpaths.


_Specimen Specification for a Compressed Asphalte Roadway._


_Excavation and Concrete._--The excavation and concrete[98] foundation
may be specified to be executed in a manner similar to that contained in
the specimen specification for wood paving,[99] except of course that
the excavation will be shallower in this case.


_Asphalte._--The asphalte to be used shall be the pure unadulterated
natural rock known as the Val de Travers, and be unmixed with any
foreign or other matter whatever. The rock after being properly broken,
shall be ground in a Carr’s disintegrator to a powder of such fineness,
that not more than      per cent. shall be left on a sieve containing
     meshes to the square inch and decrepitation by heat will not be
accepted. This powder shall be heated to 240° F. or such other
temperature as shall be found desirable, so as to eliminate all
moisture, and carefully transported to the street in covered iron carts,
in order that not more than 20° F. of heat shall be lost in transit. The
powder must be spread upon the concrete    inches in thickness[100] and
carefully raked so as to have regularity of depth and surface.


_Ramming._--The powder must then be rammed with iron punners of not less
weight than 10 lb. heated so as to prevent the adhesion of the asphalte.
The ramming must be done lightly at first, so as to ensure equality of
thickness, and afterwards augmented to heavy blows. Where the rammers
are not available a T tool must be employed.

To meet some of the objections to compressed asphalte as a material for
roadways the “Imperishable Stone Paving Blocks” have been introduced in
America; they consist of asphalte formed into rectangular blocks under
pressure of about one ton to the square inch, these are laid close
together without any grouting, and a pavement of this description is
said to combine all the advantages of wood and asphalte, though
sufficient time has not yet elapsed to prove this.

In Salford, Manchester, etc., I believe “Woodward’s Patent Molten
Ironstone Blocks” are used with some success where there is not any very
exceptionally heavy traffic.

One of the principal reasons of durability in asphalte pavement is its
elasticity, and it should be remembered that compressed asphalte does
not begin to “wear” until all compression has ceased; this is the case
with no other system of pavement--stone and wood both begin “wearing”
from the day the traffic commences. Under ordinarily heavy traffic it
may be estimated that it will take two years to complete the compression
of asphalte, and the weight of a square foot of this pavement will at
the expiration of that time be nearly the same as on the day it was
laid, though the thickness is reduced during the first two years as
much as it will be in the following eight.

Much is said about the advisability of _good_ and _dry_ concrete, but it
may be as well to explain the reasons that necessitate so much care in
the foundation. First, it should be always borne in mind that asphalte
pavement is nothing more than a tough “carpet,” and has no power of
itself of offering resistance to heavy traffic; consequently, if the
substratum or concrete is not thoroughly solid and resisting, the weight
of traffic will crush it, and the asphalte will at once give way in all
directions. The concrete should be made strong enough to resist the
traffic, and the asphalte is a simple covering to protect the concrete
from direct contact with the wear and friction caused by the traffic. So
much for the strength, but the dryness is of even still greater
importance; for the best asphalte, laid by skilled workmen, on
thoroughly first-rate but damp concrete, will rapidly go to pieces--a
phenomenon takes place, which, although quite natural, is little
realised by most engineers. When the hot asphalte is laid, the water is
immediately sucked up and turned into steam, which tries to escape
through the heated powder, and the result is that although the surface
of the asphalte is smooth, the mass is really disintegrated from
underneath by its bitter enemy “water,” and as soon as the surface
begins to wear, the fissures formed by the passing of the steam appear
on the surface and the whole pavement falls to pieces: thus accounting
for some of the failures this description of roadway has met with under
unskilled treatment.

This completes the subject of roadways; I will turn to that of footpaths
in the next chapter.

  [90] In this respect the Seyssel is the best, being of a very fine
  grain.

  [91] _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of Institution of Civil
  Engineers,’ vol. lx.

  [92] _Vide_ Mr. Howarth’s paper on ‘Wood as a Paving Material under
  Heavy Traffic,’ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
  Engineers, vol. lviii. p. 35.

  [93] In Paris and other cities liable to civil war or internal
  commotions, it is contended as an advantage of asphalte that it cannot
  be used for the construction of barricades, breastworks, or rifle
  pits.

  [94] _Vide_ Mr. Haywood’s Report upon Asphalte and Wood Pavements,
  also Report on the Application of Science and Art to Street Paving and
  Cleansing of the Metropolis,’ and numerous other pamphlets and reports
  by eminent authorities upon the subject.

  [95] _Vide_ ‘Asphalte and its Application to Street Paving,’ by E. B.
  Ellice Clarke, ‘Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and
  Sanitary Engineers,’ vol. vi. p. 52.

  [96] The asphaltic roadways of Paris, of which there were 290,000
  square yards in the year 1878, cost from 10_s._ to 12_s._ per square
  yard to lay, and about 8·83 pence per square yard per annum to
  maintain, including the charge for renewing ¹⁄₁₅th part of the surface
  every year, which is the method adopted there. _Vide_ ‘Annales
  Industrielles,’ 1878.

  [97] _Vide_ Mr. Haywood’s report on asphalte and wood pavements, 1874.

  [98] “Lime concrete ruins compressed work.” _Vide_ ‘Asphalte and its
  Application to Street Paving,’ by B. Ellice Clarke. ‘Proceedings of
  the Association of Municipal and Sanitary Engineers and Surveyors,’
  vol. vi. p. 46.

  [99] See p. 94 _ante_.

  [100] It must be ²⁄₅ths more in thickness than that specified as
  finished.




CHAPTER XI.

FOOTPATHS.


As in the case of roadways, so with footpaths: the foundation is of
primary importance, whatever material may be used for the surface. Where
this material may be classed under the head of “Paving,” concrete[101]
makes the best foundation. For gravel, tar paving, or other similar
surface, a hard core bottom well drained is sufficient. The materials of
which a footpath can be formed are almost innumerable, but the following
may be given as embodying most of them:

(1.) Natural asphalte, compressed and mastic.

(2.) Yorkshire flagging--Caithness flagging.

(3.) Blue lias, and Devonian limestone flagging.

(4.) Concrete.

(5.) Bricks.

(6.) Granite slabs.

(7.) Artificial asphaltes, including tar pavement.

(8.) Gravel.

First on the list stands natural asphalte, compressed and mastic.

The compressed has been thoroughly described in the preceding chapter;
it is sometimes used for footpaths where there is a very heavy traffic,
and answers admirably.

I will, however, now deal solely with mastic asphalte, which means the
rock ground to powder, mixed with a certain proportion of bitumen to act
as a flux, and then subjected to heat; this is sometimes used in
conjunction with fine sharp clean river sand, but more often with finely
crushed stone about the size of peppercorns, and is styled “gritted
asphalte.”

As long ago as the year 1838, Mr. F. W. Simms speaks of asphalte mastic
from Pyrimont, near Seyssel, and says “it may be considered a species of
mineral leather”[102]--a very good description of its surprisingly
tough, hard, durable and pliant properties.

The usual method of the preparation of the mastic is as follows:--

According to the amount of bitumen contained in the natural stone, from
5 to 8 per cent. of refined Trinidad bitumen[103] is placed in a large
caldron which is usually provided with agitators driven by steam power;
when this is thoroughly melted, the powdered asphalte is added little by
little, the heat being raised to between 390° and 480° F., the mixture
kept well stirred and “cooked” for about five hours. It is then turned
out into iron moulds, most companies having a special pattern with a
trade mark for this purpose.

The caldrons generally used contain from 1¹⁄₂ to 2 tons of mastic.

Some companies in large towns are provided with caldrons on wheels,
commonly called “Locomobiles,” in which case the grit is mixed with the
mastic in the fixed caldrons, and the whole mass run out into the
locomobiles (which are also provided with agitators worked by an endless
chain attached to the axle of the wheels), and transported direct to
where the work has to be done. This system, though undoubtedly the best,
is not practicable except in large towns; the more usual method of
laying mastic footpaths is to send the asphalte cakes to the works,
where they are remelted in small round street caldrons, containing from
8 to 12 cakes each, weighing from 40 to 50 lbs., the grit being
sometimes added in the fixed caldrons, sometimes in the street caldrons,
this amount of grit varying from 20 to 60 per cent. according to the
nature of the work.

The grit makes the asphalte more difficult to spread, but it lessens the
cost and makes a very durable path. The affinity between the asphalte
and grit is so great that, in breaking a sample, the actual pieces of
grit will be found broken in half.

The asphalte should be spread from ¹⁄₂ to ⁷⁄₈ of an inch in thickness
(if compressed 1 inch is the minimum), and should be brought hot on to
the works in covered caldrons on wheels, the test of its being ready and
fit to lay being made by plunging a wooden spatula into it, which should
come out without any of the asphalte adhering to it, and also by jets of
light smoke darting out of the mixture.

The mastic should be taken from the caldron with a warmed ladle, and put
into buckets previously heated, then thrown out on the concrete (which
should be perfectly dry) near the spreader, who spreads it skilfully
with a wooden stave, spreader, or spatula. The surface should then be
floated and dusted over with fine sand, portland cement, or stone dust.

Dishonest contractors sometimes substitute inferior materials for
natural asphalte, such imitations being made of ground chalk, fire-clay,
and pitch or gas tar, or ground limestone mixed with bitumen.

A sample of the footpath after it is laid should be cut out (this is
easily effected by heating the surface with a piece of hot mastic), in
order to see that the proper thickness is given, and by applying a light
to the sample, the smell will readily tell if real asphalte or any
inferior material has been used. Stockholm tar or common pitch should
not be allowed to be substituted for Trinidad bitumen, or it will spoil
the mastic.

Asphalte mastic footpaths are excellent in every way, the only
objections to them being the necessity for the grit, and the temporary
unpleasant smoke and smell whilst being laid. It is also necessary to
put stone sills round the cellar openings and coal shutes, etc., for it
to butt against, but it makes an invaluable pavement, especially for
courts, alleys, back yards, etc., for sanitary and other reasons.

The proportions of asphalte, bitumen and grit are given as follows by
Mr. Delano in his translation of a paper by M. Ernest Chabrier, on the
applications of asphalte.[104]

“One ton of sanded mastic requires 13 cwt. of pure block mastic, 2 qrs.
12 lb. of bitumen, 7 cwt. of grit or sand washed and dried,” and it
takes 2 cwt. of coal to heat it. He further says that one workman can
easily prepare 3 tons of material in 12 hours.

The following table gives the number of square yards that a ton of
prepared Sicilian rock asphalte will spread.

  ----+--------------+---------------------+----------+----
      |              |     With about      |          |
      |Without grit. |25 per cent. of grit.|Thickness.|
      +--------------+---------------------+----------+
      |square yards. |    square yards.    | inches.  |
      |     63       |          80         |    ³⁄₈   |
      |     51       |          65         |    ¹⁄₂   |
      |     32       |          40         |    ³⁄₄   |
      |     26       |          33         |   1      |
      |     16       |          20         |   1¹⁄₂   |
      |     12¹⁄₂    |          16         |    2     |
  ----+--------------+---------------------+----------+----

A skilled workman properly assisted can lay 140 to 180 square yards in a
day.[105]

With regard to the price of asphalte mastic footpaths, this is quite a
local question, and is not worth while discussing. The life of a
footpath thus treated may be reckoned at about 15 years under ordinary
traffic; the concrete will remain untouched and what is left of the
asphalte may be remelted, so that a renewal is not so costly as the
first expense.


_Yorkshire Flagging._--This pavement is too well known to need any
description from me; it is an excellent pavement in many ways, and is
most pleasant to walk upon, there being a cling or foothold not
experienced in any other material.

The objections to this description of pavement are:--

(1.) Its first cost, which is undoubtedly high as compared to its
durability.

(2.) The fact of uneven wearing: one stone will be found soft next to a
hard one; the former wears, leaving a pit which forms a pool for water
in due course, and has to be removed.

(3.) Unless very carefully bedded, a stone will see-saw; this is very
unpleasant in wet weather, water accumulates beneath, and as the
pedestrian treads on one end of the stone a squirt of dirty water up to
his knees, and a stumble, remind him that the stone is loose.

(4.) Liability to crack when any heavy goods are thrown upon it.

The following specimen specification for Yorkshire flagging pavement may
be of use.


_Specimen Specification for Yorkshire Flagging Foot Pavements._

The old flagging (where and when directed) to be taken up, refaced,
squared, and relaid.

The new flagging is to be chisel-dressed to a fair face, true, out of
winding, and not less than 3 inches thick,[106] to be properly squared
and not pitched off only, or undercut, but to hold good to the square;
to have not more than fourteen pieces to the hundred superficial feet;
the joints must be set flush, and bedded and pointed with the best blue
lias mortar.

The bed for the flagging both old and new, if any is required, to be
made with proper earth, gravel, or dry rubbish, and all surplus earth
and rubbish to be carted from the streets as it arises from the works.

The flagging to be properly cut and rebated to receive all area
gratings, coal shoots, rain water troughs, &c.

Any damage done to gas or water service pipes in digging for the
flagging, or in any way connected with the work, to be made good by the
contractor, as also all and every other damage to windows, wood, or
glass work; and the contractor will be held responsible for, and will
make compensation for any injury that the public may sustain through the
negligence of his workmen, or otherwise.

The whole of the flags to be of the very best quality, from Halifax, the
quarries in the neighbourhood of Bradford or in Yorkshire, and subject
to the approval of the surveyor.

The contractor to provide all lights and proper guards at night, and
when old paving is to be taken up the work is to be done under the
direction of the surveyor, and if considered necessary, the stones are
to be removed from the streets to be re-faced and squared. No stone to
be stacked in the streets.

The flagging to be measured after the work is completed.

The contractor to provide all stone, materials, tools, implements, horse
and cart hire, and pay all railway dues, freightages, etc., and also to
provide all labour of every kind for properly completing the work to the
full and entire satisfaction of the surveyor. Payment will be made as
the work proceeds, on the certificate of the surveyor.

Should the contractor fail to perform the work to the satisfaction of
the surveyor, he then shall have power to execute the work and charge
the same to the contractor, and deduct the cost from any amount that may
be due to him; and in the event of the cost being more than the amount
due, or if there shall then be no sum due to the contractor, such cost
shall be paid by the contractor to the mayor, aldermen, and citizens,
and the same shall be recoverable from him as liquidated and ascertained
damages.


_Caithness Flagging_ is now used very largely instead of Yorkshire; it
comes from Thurso in Scotland, and it is contended for it that it
possesses many excellent qualities, amongst others may be enumerated the
following:

(1). It is impervious to wet.

(2.) It is not slippery nor does it wear so.

(3.) It does not scale or flake.

(4.) It dries rapidly after rain.

(5.) Its appearance is cheerful.

(6.) Great durability, as it does not abrade.

(7.) Frost has no effect upon it.

(8.) Can be re-used when half worn.

(9.) Cleanliness; for, not being porous, no dirt or dust can adhere to
it.

(10.) Vehicular traffic may be turned over it without injury to the
path.

(11.) Economy; as natural forces can be used, thus saving labour, and it
can be laid from 1¹⁄₂ to 2 inches thick only.

(12.) Having sawn edges, the joints are expeditiously and well made.

(13.) Its whole surface wears evenly.

The following table was compiled by the well-known firm of Kirkaldy, by
direction of Mr. Tarbotton the Borough Engineer of Nottingham, in order
to ascertain the resistance to a gradually increased bending stress upon
Yorkshire flagging as compared with Caithness.

                         YORKSHIRE.
  --------+-------+---------------------------+--------
          |       |       Dimensions.         |
          |       +-------+--------+----------+Ultimate
  Test No.|Weight.|Length.|Breadth.|Thickness.|Stress.
  --------+-------+-------+--------+----------+--------
      K   |  lbs. |inches.| inches.|  inches. |  lb.
     1918 |  184  |   36  |  24·07 |   2·46   |  4·744
     1919 |  163  |   36  |  24·03 |   2·22   |  3·398
     1920 |  107  |   36  |  23·90 |   1·50   |  1·459
          +-------+-------+--------+----------+--------
     Mean |  151  |   36  |  24·00 |   2·06   |  3·200
  --------+-------+-------+--------+----------+--------
                         CAITHNESS.
  --------+-------+---------------------------+--------
          |       |       Dimensions.         |
          |       +-------+--------+----------+Ultimate
  Test No.|Weight.|Length.|Breadth.|Thickness.|Stress.
  --------+-------+-------+--------+----------+--------
      K   |  lb.  |inches.| inches.|  inches. |  lb.
     1921 |  215  |   36  |  24·06 |   2·59   | 17·274
     1922 |  178  |   36  |  24·05 |   2·15   | 12·711
     1923 |  114  |   36  |  23·90 |   1·38   |  6·211
          +-------+-------+--------+----------+--------
     Mean |  169  |   36  |  24·00 |   2·04   | 12·065
  --------+-------+-------+--------+----------+--------

By which it appears that the balance in favour of Caithness flagging is
8·865 lbs.

The objection to this style of flagging is, that however varied the
sizes of the stones selected may be, as they have sawn edges and are
very hard to cut with a chisel, a difficulty sometimes arises in
finishing rounded corners of footpaths, and against uneven frontages of
shops or buildings abutting on the footpath; this is especially the case
in old towns.


_Blue Lias Flagging._--A blue lias flagging does not make a first-rate
pavement, as although it is very cheap, durable, clean, and has many
other good qualities, it sometimes wears slippery and is then dangerous
to pedestrians; but the Devonian limestone, which is much used in the
west of England, has not apparently this defect.


_Concrete Footpaths._--These have been tried in this country, but
generally without success; the concrete or cement cracks, and in
addition to this the paths wear slippery and greasy, and as some time is
necessary in order to allow the concrete to thoroughly set before the
traffic can be allowed on them, they have not found much favour.

In the United States, however, concrete footpaths seem to be made
successfully; the following detail particulars of such a foot-pavement
will, I think, be of great interest and use.[107]

“Concrete footpaths should be laid upon a form of well-compacted sand,
or fine gravel, or a mixture of sand, gravel and loam. The natural soil,
if sufficiently porous to provide thorough sub-drainage, will
answer.[108]

“It is not usual to attempt to guard entirely against the lifting
effects of frost, but to provide for it by laying the concrete in
squares or rectangles, each containing from 12 to 16 superficial feet,
which will yield to upheaval individually, like flagging stones, without
breaking and without producing extensive disturbance in the general
surface.

“When a case arises, however, where it is deemed necessary to prevent
any movement whatever, it can be done by underlying the pavement with a
bed of broken stone, or a mixture of broken stone and gravel, or with
ordinary pit gravel containing just enough of detritus and loam to bind
it together. In high latitudes this bed should be 1 foot and upwards in
thickness, and should be so thoroughly subdrained that it will always be
free from standing water. It is formed in the usual manner of making
broken stone or gravel roads already described, and finished off on top
with a layer of sand or fine gravel, about 1 inch in depth, for the
concrete to rest upon.

“The concrete should not be less than 3¹⁄₂, and need rarely exceed 4 to
4¹⁄₂ inches in thickness, the upper surface to the depth of ¹⁄₂ an inch
should be composed of hydraulic cement and sand only. Portland cement is
best for this top layer. For the rest, any natural American cement of
standard quality will answer. The following proportions are recommended
for this bottom layer.

  Rosendale or other American cement  1   measure
  Clean sharp sand                    2¹⁄₂   „
  Stone and gravel                    5      „

“It is mixed from time to time as required for use, and is compacted
with an iron-shod rammer in a single layer to a thickness less by ¹⁄₂ an
inch than that of the required pavement. As soon as this is done and
before the cement has had time to set, the surface is roughened by
scratching, and the top layer, composed of,

  1 volume of Portland cement, and
  2 to 2¹⁄₂ volumes of clean fine sand,

is spread over it to a uniform thickness of about 1¹⁄₂ inch, and then
compacted by rather light blows, with an iron-shod rammer. By this means
its thickness is diminished to ¹⁄₂ an inch. It is then smoothed off and
polished with a mason’s trowel and covered up with hay, grass, sand, or
other suitable material to protect it from the rays of the sun, and
prevent its drying too rapidly.

“It should be kept damp and thus protected for at least 10 days, and
longer if circumstances will permit; and even after it is opened to
travel, a layer of damp sand should be kept upon it for two or three
weeks, to prevent wear while tender.

“At the end of one month from the date of laying, the Portland cement
mixture forming the top surface will have attained nearly one-half its
ultimate strength and hardness, and may then be subjected to use by
foot-passengers without injury.

“The rammers for compacting the concrete should weigh from 15 to 20 lb.,
those used on the surface layer from 10 to 12 lb. They are made by
attaching rectangular blocks of hard wood shod with iron to wood handles
about 3 feet long, and are plied in an upright position. Certain
precautions are necessary in mixing and ramming the materials in order
to secure the best results. Especial care should be taken to avoid the
use of too much water in the manipulation. The mass of concrete, when
ready for use, should appear quite incoherent, and not wet and plastic,
containing water however in such quantities that a thorough ramming with
repeated though not hard blows will produce a thin film of moisture upon
the surface under the rammer, without causing in the mass a gelatinous
or quicksand motion.”

Under the head of Concrete may be included many artificial stone
pavements, such as “Bucknell’s Granite Breccia” “Ransome’s Artificial
Stone,” “Eureka Concrete,” “Granolithic,” and the “Silicated Victoria
Stone,” this last being worth a description. The stone is really a
concrete, formed by mixing very superior Portland cement with crushed
Thames gravel, furnace or iron slag, Kentish rag-stone, granite
chippings, or other suitable material carefully washed. This fine
concrete, after being mixed in the moulds forming the slabs, is
thoroughly incorporated by being rocked or jiggled in a trembling
machine; this motion, as can be easily understood, making the whole mass
even and homogeneous when it sets. The cost of the slabs is about 9_d._
per square foot, 3 inches in thickness, and they make an excellent
footpath.


_Brick Footpaths._--These are sometimes constructed of ordinary bricks
laid on their sides, but soon wear, and are unsuitable for the
purpose.[109] Staffordshire blue paving bricks make an excellent
footpath. These are bricks made of stoneware highly vitrified; they
should be about 12 inches in length by 6 inches wide, by about 2⁷⁄₈
inches in thickness, their surface being chequered with a diamond
pattern so as to prevent their being slippery. They are exceedingly
hard and durable if well burnt, and to ascertain this a brick should be
broken across and the colour, etc., noted.

They should be laid in cement mortar upon a bed of concrete or sand. The
objections to this class of pavement are as follows:

(1.) The colour is objectionable; being very dark, the footpaths give a
street the appearance of mourning.

(2.) The difficulty of breaking up the path for gas or water services,
or for other purposes.

(3.) The hardness of the bricks makes them awkward to cut to rounded
corners, or for water trunks, coal-holes, etc.

(4.) A loaded hand-barrow driven over them will sometimes break off the
chequered pattern.

(5.) They are slippery in a frost after snow.

But notwithstanding these disadvantages, they make a most wonderfully
durable and useful pavement for back streets.


_Granite Slab Pavement._--This is sometimes adopted, large granite
slabs, 6 inches in thickness being laid; they are very useful when there
are cellars underneath, or where heavy vehicular traffic is intended to
cross the foot pavement. Granite is of course excessively durable, but
it wears very slippery with traffic and must then be tooled or axed; in
process of time this wears it out, and its first cost is heavy.

This description of pavement can be laid with advantage in front of
markets or similar buildings.


_Artificial Asphalte Pavements._--The cost of obtaining natural rock
asphalte from the mines, and the knowledge that it is composed of two
very simple ingredients, limestone and bitumen, has led to a great
number of artificial asphaltes being introduced, especially for foot
pavements. “British Rock Asphalte” is a name by which many of the
compositions are known; “Beauchamp’s Mendip Mountain Machine-made
Granite Asphalte” is a high-sounding title; “Prentice’s Mineral Foreign
Rock Asphalte” is another.

All these, and many more of the same description, are really what may be
better and more correctly described as “tar concrete” or “tar paving,”
and consist of different modifications of the homely coal-tar and
limestone.

So long ago as the year 1840, “Lord Stanhope’s Composition” was well
known; it was made as follows:

Three gallons of Stockholm tar, 2 bushels of well-dried chalk, 1 bushel
of fine, sharp, clean sifted sand, the whole being boiled in an iron
caldron.

Tar paving is now made in many and various ways by different surveyors
of towns, some making it with hot compositions, some with cold. A
description will be found in the chapter on Macadamised Roadways, page
46, of one method of making it, a modification of this being all that is
necessary for foot pavements.

The best paths of this description that I have seen are to be found at
Torquay, and by the kind permission of Mr. John Little, County Surveyor
of Devon, and late Surveyor of Torquay, I give his useful specification
in detail, as follows:


_Tar Concrete for Footpaths._

PROPORTIONS OF MATERIALS.

  12 barrow loads of engine ashes.
   4    „     „      screened slaked blue lias lime.
   4    „     „      small spar or sharp grit.
  34 gallons of best gas tar.
  20 bucketsful, say 70 to 80 gallons of water.


_Method of Mixing._--On a clean flagged or wooden floor spread three
barrow-loads of ashes, then about one barrow-load of lime, and so on
until the whole of the dry materials (or one mixing) has been spread;
then throw over them about three bucketfuls of tar, and before mixing it
with them add (say) six bucketfuls of water; then mix as for concrete,
and when the liquids are pretty well absorbed add a similar quantity,
mix again, and so on until all the liquids have been absorbed; the mass
will then be something of the consistency of ordinary mortar. Next pass
the whole three times _at least_ through a pug mill: if this be not done
the concrete will be a failure. An ordinary hand pug-mill will not be
sufficient; the knives are not strong enough, nor will it incorporate
the materials thoroughly, but an upright pug-mill, worked by steam power
where practicable, or by at least one horse, should be used.

It will be found that as the mass emerges from the pug-mill a large
proportion of the water will run from it; means should therefore be
provided for allowing the water to escape freely from the floor.


_Method of Laying._--Prepare the path for a layer of concrete 3 inches
in thickness, on a hard dry bottom, inclining from the inside to the
kerb, at the rate of ¹⁄₂ an inch to a foot for pathways not more than 6
or 7 feet wide, but for wider pathways an inclination of ³⁄₈ of an inch
to a foot will be sufficient.

A template the full width of the path having been provided, lay concrete
with a shovel on the inner side of the path for a length of (say) 15
feet and a width of 1 foot, at such a height that when it has been well
rammed and patted with shovels it shall be the exact height intended for
the path; this is to form a resting-place for one end of the template,
the kerb forming that for the other end; then fill the intervening space
with concrete up to the template, treading and ramming it solidly for
about twenty minutes, and as it gets into shape, patting it with shovels
and smoothing with a trowel; then, with an iron (not stone) roller
weighing about 5 cwts., roll for two hours, trimming and filling up
hollows where necessary; then go on with another length, and
occasionally roll the first for half-an-hour, and so on. Experience
alone will decide the quantity of rolling necessary after the first day
or two, as weather and other causes tend to a more rapid solidification
of the concrete at some times than at others.

On the third day, sprinkle a small quantity of sea or other very fine
sand on the concrete, and allow it to remain for two or three days after
the path has been in use--it should then be removed.


_General Remarks._--The ashes should not be those from a saw-mill or
other place where wood ashes would be mixed with them. All ashes, spar
or grit, and lime, should be passed through a screen of ³⁄₈-inch mesh.
The lime should be the best blue lias, slaked under cover; it should be
allowed to lie for at least four days, but not more than six days,
before it is used. The spar or grit should be sharp and angular.

Great care should be taken to keep the concrete free from mud or dust;
it should be tipped from the carts or barrows, either directly into
place, or, if this cannot be done, a few slabs or boards should be laid
down, on which it may be tipped.

The path should not be used until the concrete is sufficiently solid to
bear a man’s weight without taking the impression of his boots.

It has been found by experience that the laying of this concrete should
not be commenced before May, and that it should not be continued beyond
the end of September (or middle of October, if the weather is very
fine). Frost is fatal to it before it has become hard, and continuous
cold wet weather retards considerably the hardening.

There can be no doubt that a pavement of this description for traffic
that is not too heavy answers every requirement; for streets of greater
traffic, genuine mastic asphalte should be used.

Before closing my remarks on artificial asphalte pavements, the
following description of an American method may be interesting:

On a dry foundation is placed a coat of rough clinkers from anthracite
coal or iron clinkers from a foundry, mixed with sand and tar in the
proportions of 15 cubic feet of fine sifted ashes, 14¹⁄₂ cubic feet of
pit sand, and 1¹⁄₂ cubic feet or 9 gallons of tar. This is laid about 3
to 4 inches thick and well rolled. Over this is placed a coating from 1
inch to 1¹⁄₂ inch thick, composed of 15 cubic feet of coarse sifted
ashes, 15 cubic feet of clinkers, and 1¹⁄₄ cubic feet or 8 gallons of
tar. It must be then well rolled and sanded, care having been taken that
the materials are thoroughly mixed.


_Gravel Footpaths._--For the suburbs of a town and in the country,
nothing looks so pretty as a gravel footpath.

The same rules that apply to a macadamised roadway apply to a gravel
footpath. They must be well “bottomed,” and well drained and well
rolled. Limestone or other stone chippings may with advantage be used
with a pit gravel for constructing paths of this description, and a
barrelled surface looks better and is more enduring than a hanging path.
The following cross sections of footpaths will explain themselves better
than any long description:

[Illustration]

Gravel footpaths are sometimes tarred over when thoroughly consolidated.
This must be done only when the weather is quite settled and fine: the
least rain will spoil the whole operation; it consists in simply tarring
over the surface of the footpath in the same manner that a gate or wall
or any other substance would be tarred. The surface of the path must
previously have been swept perfectly clean, and immediately as the
tarring is completed, fine stone dust must be sprinkled on its surface;
the traffic should be diverted from it for a few hours, and it is then
ready.

Care must be taken that the tar is not too thin in consistency, and that
the coat is not put on too thick. Treating a path in this manner saves
gravel, which is washed or kicked off it if left with an ordinary
surface; but a cold night, a slight shower, or inferior tar will make
the whole process abortive, and the path will be in a fearful mess in
the winter.

  [101] Concrete is especially necessary as a foundation for asphalte,
  as it has little or no power of resistance to vertical pressure in
  itself, and indentations in its surface would be very unsightly as
  well as hold water. The concrete should be perfectly dry and
  thoroughly set before the asphalte is laid on it.

  [102] _Vide_ ‘Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,’ vol.
  i. p. 6.

  [103] Trinidad bitumen is best, but it has to be refined before it can
  be used. This is done by cooking it with shale oil, then straining it
  and decanting it, which is a troublesome and tedious process, and
  there is great danger of fraud being practised. Good bitumen can be
  detected by its elasticity and softness when rolled between the finger
  and thumb, and also by its smell.

  [104] _Vide_ ‘Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,’ vol.
  xliii. p. 293.

  [105] _Ibid_, vol. xliii. p. 293.

  [106] A rule is sometimes made that York flags should be ¹⁄₂-inch
  thick for every square foot of surface, but they should never be less
  than 2 inches thick.

  [107] _Vide_ ‘Roads, Streets, and Pavements,’ by Q. A. Gillmore, p.
  208.

  [108] Sawdust 2 feet in thickness has sometimes been used, well rammed
  and rolled.

  [109] The town of Brighton is an instance of this. Ordinary red bricks
  used to be laid as a footpath, no doubt to give a rural appearance for
  the eye of the jaded Londoner, but these are giving place to more
  modern materials.




CHAPTER XII.

KERBING AND CHANNELLING, ETC.


For all footpaths both urban and sub-urban a kerb of some description is
necessary to be fixed on the outside of the footpath, for the following
reasons:

(1.) It acts as a sill against which the material of which the footpath
is paved may butt.

(2.) It retains both the foundation and surface of the footpath.

(3.) Whether there is a paved channel gutter or not, a kerb is necessary
in order to finish the haunches of the roadway.

(4.) The appearance of a footpath without kerbing is very unsightly.

(5.) Unless a footpath is raised above the roadway it is liable to be
flooded.

Many materials are used for kerb, of which granite being the best is
generally used in streets where there is much traffic, as the kerb is
often subjected to severe blows from the passing vehicular traffic as
well as a grinding action from the wheels of waggons and other heavy
vehicles, especially on gradients where “hugging” the kerb acts as a
drag or break. In such cases granite, although the most expensive in the
first case, is certainly the most economical, and no other material
should ever be used.

Granite kerb varies in dimensions considerably in different localities
and according to the width of the footpaths, the wider the path the
wider should be the kerb. It should however never be of less depth than
9 inches, nor narrower than 4 inches; depth is necessary to prevent the
kerb turning over towards the channel gutter, or water table as it is
sometimes termed, and the filling in on the gutter side must also be
well rammed with a bar to prevent this. Kerb should never be in less
lengths than 3 feet, and when 8 inches and broader it is better that the
top surface should be bevelled off to conform with the slope of the
footpath, but in narrower kerbing such a practice is unnecessary, and if
carried to an extreme may even be dangerous.

The kerb should be drafted about 1 inch along both top edges and hammer
dressed about 5 inches on the face, in addition to the whole surface of
the top and for 3 inches at the back, in order that there may be a
smooth surface visible against the channel gutter, and also for the
flagging or other paving to butt fair against, besides giving a clean
appearance to the aris of kerb both inside and out.

The following section of an 8-inch granite kerb will explain this:

[Illustration]

The top surface should always be tooled or axed whenever it has worn
smooth and slippery, as a slip from a kerbstone often causes a very bad
fall to a pedestrian.

Setting kerb requires a very experienced hand, for as it is set dry
great care must be shown, or it will sink, turn slightly over, or move
even months after it has been set. In addition to this it is heavy stuff
to handle, but unless the line is accurate both as regards level and
contour, the appearance will be exceedingly bad. Of course the skillet
line and boning rods are freely used in setting kerb, but even with
these helps one mason will set kerb in a pleasing manner, whilst
another, with even more care, does not seem able to make it appear
graceful.

Deep and narrow kerb should be bedded on good clean river gravel, and
beaten into its place with hard blows from a heavy wooden setting maul
or beetle weighing not less than 50 lbs.

Broader and shallower kerb should be bedded on concrete.

In addition to granite, kerbing is also made of Endon or Yorkshire
stone, limestone, and for brick pavements a kerb specially made of the
same material is generally used; it is also, though not often in this
country, constructed of wood, old railway sleepers being used for the
purpose. In the more rural districts grass sods are used with good
effect for gravel paths.

It is difficult to estimate the cost of kerbing, as local questions must
interfere, carriage of the material and value of labour entering so
largely into the question.

Mr. Codrington[110] states that “A limestone kerb about 1 foot deep and
4 inches wide costs from 2_s._ 6_d._ to 3_s._ 6_d._ per lineal yard, and
a channel 10 inches wide by 6 inches thick rather more.

“Granite kerbs 12 inches wide by 9 inches deep, 6_s._ 6_d._ to 7_s._ per
yard run.

“Granite channel 12 inches wide by 6 inches deep, 4_s._ 6_d._ per lineal
yard.

“A channel 12 inches wide, formed of granite cubes 4 inches by 7 inches,
costs about the same.”

I have found that granite kerb 6 by 12 inches could be fixed “_in situ_”
at 3_s._ 3_d._ per yard run, and 8 by 12 inches at 4_s._ 6_d._ per
lineal yard.

Granite channelling composed of 3 courses of granite pitchers 6 by 8
inches, costing 5_s._ 6_d._ per lineal yard.

Limestone channelling 15 inches in width by 3 inches in depth, costing
3_s._ per lineal yard.

A paved channel, gutter, or water table is of the greatest use to a
roadway, besides adding greatly to its appearance. Without such a
channel the haunches of a road become sadly damaged by the wash of the
surface water, which is sometimes so extreme as to undermine the kerb
and cause it to fall out.

These channel gutters are made of different materials for macadamised
roads, granite setts laid in the direction of the gutter being the best.
A channel gutter should not be less than 18 inches wide, so that if made
with ordinary 3-inch setts, 6 courses will be necessary; they should be
bedded on gravel and well grouted in with lime or cement grouting.
Sometimes granite slabs 18 inches wide by 3 or 4 inches thick are used
and make an excellent gutter, they are however liable to tip under heavy
loads. Limestone slabs can also be used in roads of light traffic with
advantage.

In streets paved with granite setts, wood blocks or asphalte, the same
material is used for the channelling, the setts or blocks being however
bedded in line with the channel instead of transversely as in the street
itself.

The channel gutter should take the slope of the roadway and the granite
kerb should show from 3 to 5 inches above it. At paved crossings it is
well to keep them level with the kerb so that pedestrians may step off
the path on to the crossing without any drop, or if there is any water
in them at such points, it is a good plan to let the edge of the
crossing drop rather suddenly towards the kerb, so that the ordinary
stride of the pedestrian carries him on to the level.

Gulley gratings or buddle holes should be placed along the line of
channel at such intervals as may be found necessary. A great number of
different forms have been from time to time introduced for this purpose,
the objects to be considered being:

(1.) Sufficient area to carry off all the water.

(2.) Not easily choked on surface by leaves or other debris.

(3.) Sufficiency of pit to retain all sand or road detritus and prevent
it being washed into the sewer.

(4.) The least possible obstruction to the traffic.

(5.) Constructed so that the pit may easily be cleaned out.

(6.) Trapped so as to prevent the escape of sewer gas.[111]

(7.) The drain from it should be easily freed of any obstruction.

One of the best forms of gully pit is that manufactured by Messrs. Oates
and Green of Halifax, as it meets nearly all the requirements which I
have summarised as being necessary for this description of work. The
following drawing will explain itself:

[Illustration]

What is called a “buddle hole,” which is an opening under the kerb, has
much to recommend it as giving a free unobstructed waterway and at the
same time avoiding the necessity of a grating in the street itself. The
following drawing will explain the general features of this
“buddle-hole:”

[Illustration]

A great number of different descriptions and forms of gully pits are
shown in Mr. Baldwin Latham’s excellent book on sanitary engineering, to
which I refer my readers for any further information upon this subject.

  [110] ‘The Maintenance of Macadamised Roads,’ by Thomas Codrington, p.
  18.

  [111] In many towns the gully gratings are purposely in direct
  communication with the sewers, so as to act as ventilators.




CHAPTER XIII.

LIGHTING STREETS.


At the present moment the question of lighting streets by electricity is
gaining so much attention, that it must necessarily be first considered
in connection with the subject of lighting streets: but to enter fully
into all the details and comparative merits of electricity and gas as
applied to street lighting would entail more space than can be afforded
in this work. It may however be of some use, even under the present
state of uncertainty, if I attempt to condense as much information upon
this necessary part of a surveyor’s duty into as small a compass as
possible. Nor must it be forgotten that electric lighting will not
easily be adapted in old cities and towns, where, in addition to the
main streets being narrow and crooked, there are few large open spaces
suitable for intense lights, and there are numerous small courts and
alleys which require lighting, and this for a long time to come will
probably be effected with gas.[112]

Section 161 of the Public Health Act 1875 enacts as follows:

“Any urban authority may contract with any person for the supply of gas
or other means of lighting the streets, markets, and public buildings in
their district, and may provide such lamps, lamp-posts and other
materials and apparatus as they may think necessary for lighting the
same. . . .” (38 and 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 161.)

I do not propose to entertain the question of lighting where the gas
works are the property of the corporation, but only to give information
that may be of use where a contract has to be entered into between the
corporation and a company. These contracts are based nearly always upon
the length of time at which the public lamps are to be kept lighted, and
may be summarised as follows:

(1.) The public lamps are lighted from sunset to sunrise every night
throughout the year; this averages 12 hours per diem, or about 4000
hours per annum.

(2.) The public lamps are not lighted on the nights of full moon, nor
for two or three nights before and after this period; the rest of the
year they are lighted at sunset.

(3.) Similar to the preceding, except that the public lamps are not
lighted during the five nights of full moon, the night after they are
lighted for one hour and extinguished on the rising of the moon; this
lighting increases from night to night about three quarters of an hour
until the moon has entirely disappeared, when the lamps are lighted
during the whole of the night for five consecutive nights. Then again on
the appearance of the new moon the lamps are extinguished the first
night for about an hour that the moon is visible, and this extension
increases nightly about three quarters of an hour according as the moon
appears until the period of full moon, the intention being to profit by
every hour of the moon’s light.

By this arrangement the lighting is about 2000 hours per annum, instead
of 4000 hours, when it is continued throughout the night during the
whole of the year.

(4.) Sometimes, in addition to the foregoing, the lamps are not lighted
at all during the summer months.

(5.) Occasionally the public lamps are extinguished at midnight all the
year round, if not for the whole, for some portions of the district, it
being assumed that all respectable citizens being in bed, no light is
required.

(6.) In some cases every other lamp only is lighted in the summer
months, and many other similar variations for the sake of economy may be
practised.

(7.) The public lamps are sometimes supplied by gas through meters,
which is then paid for at so much per 1000 cubic feet consumed.

Of all the above methods the first is undoubtedly the most satisfactory
to the inhabitants, the urban authority, their officers, and the gas
company; it is the least likely to introduce disputes, and although
something may be saved by adopting the more parsimonious methods
enumerated, it is found in practice that the first is the best.

In drawing up an agreement with the gas company to light the public
street lamps for any length of time, the following points must be
considered.


_Hints for a Contract with a Gas Company._

The company to provide a sufficient supply of gas of the full
illuminating power and quality as provided by their Act.

Payment to be at so much per lamp, or per 1000 cubic feet consumed, or
at per hour, or whatever may be determined on.

Payment to be made by urban authority for lighting, extinguishing,
cleaning, repairing, etc., as may be agreed, such payments to be made
quarterly, or at such times as may be agreed upon.

The hours or times throughout the year during which the lamps shall be
lighted to be determined by a table, every lamp to be fully lighted
within one hour of the time named, and not extinguished before that
named for extinguishing. The consumption of the gas to be regulated and
determined by Sugg’s or Borradaile’s street lamp governors, or such
other mode as is agreed upon.

The company to keep the governors and burners in repair, and also the
lanterns, at a fixed sum per lamp per annum.

The company to light and extinguish, and keep all lanterns clean, and
all pipes, valves, etc., in repair.

The company to keep the lamp posts etc., properly painted after they are
fixed by the urban authority. Lamps may be shifted or fresh lamps
erected by the urban authority, on their paying the cost.

The company not to be compelled to supply gas to lamps which are beyond
a certain distance of their existing mains, without compensation.

A certain pressure of gas must be maintained, to be ascertained by water
gauges fixed at certain public places, or at such points as may be
determined.

Any lamps burning under size or out, shall be immediately attended to by
the company. A deduction in payment for gas by the urban authority to be
made if neglect can be proved. An arbitration clause is necessary for
this or other matters that may be disputed, and also a clause for
determining the agreement upon notice being given.

In supplying gas to the public lamps by meter, either wet or dry meters
may be employed, and these are fixed either in the lamp posts themselves
or under the footpath. Sometimes each lamp has a separate meter, but in
the generality of cases one meter fixed to a lamp gives the average of
gas consumed by ten or a dozen of its fellows at the same level, and in
the same neighbourhood. The difficulties arising from this system are:

(1.) The liability of the meters to get out of repair, especially in
times of severe frost, or by vibration of traffic.

(2.) The first cost of providing and fixing the meters, and subsequent
cost of repairs.

(3.) The trouble and cost of inspection and keeping the accounts.

And it is found that by employing either “Borradaile’s,” “Sugg’s,” or
other regulators the consumption of the gas can be readily adjusted to
consume from 3 to 6 cubic feet per hour, according to the requirements
of the situation of the lamp.[113]

Lamp posts and lanterns are of innumerable sizes, shapes, and patterns,
but the following hints in connection with them may be of some service.

The lamp must not only be ornamental by day, but useful by night.

The light must not be placed either too high or too low.

The post must not be too clumsy so as to interfere with the pedestrian
traffic, nor too fragile so as to be easily broken if driven against.
Bracket lamps have advantages in these respects, and also in the very
important one of throwing no downward shadow,[114] as well as being
cheaper.

The lantern should be made with the lightest possible amount of metal
frame compatible with sufficient strength, the angle bars should be very
narrow to avoid shadow, trap doors of perforated zinc or glass should be
provided at the bottom for the admission of the torch, and a good outlet
at the top is essential for the escape of the heated air. Flat glass is
much cheaper and easier of repair than curved. The top of the lantern
should be furnished with a reflector cover, otherwise a large percentage
of the light is lost: this is very observable on approaching a large
city, by the glare which is thrown upwards. Some hundreds of different
patterns of lanterns for street lamps have been designed from time to
time, and it is not necessary, nor have I space, to describe them.

The burners should have steatite tips and be of varying size to suit the
requirements of the locality, the regulators which I have previously
mentioned must be kept in good repair. A lever tap is indispensable with
the torch for lighting, as well as the trap door or opening in the
bottom of the lantern through which the torch is inserted.

Each public lamp post should be legibly numbered, and the surveyor
should keep a register in his office of all the public lamps in his
town.

In order to determine the distance apart of the public lamps in a
street, it must be remembered that the intensity of light is directly
proportional to the illuminating power of the light, and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance of the light, if unreflected.
For instance, the illumination of any point between lamps may be arrived
at by adding all the quotients obtained by dividing the illuminating
power in standard sperm candles of each lamp, by the square of its
distance in yards from the point.

Thus a point midway between two lamps of 15 candles each, 20 yards
apart, would be reckoned thus:

       15    15
  X = --- + --- = ·30
      100   100

In this country, the rule has generally been adopted that public street
lamps burning 5 cube feet per hour of 15 candle gas should not be placed
at a greater distance than 60 yards apart, the average distance in most
English towns being about 40 yards.

On this question, the following interesting particulars by Monsieur
Servier will be of special interest.[115]

It appears to M. Servier that up to the present there has been too much
straining after intensity, with insufficient care for the object of
obtaining a proper quantity of light uniformly spread over the surface
of the ground. The paper in question is therefore intended in the first
place to elucidate this latter subject, so as to determine beforehand
the necessary intensity for luminous centres, gas or electric, and also
their height from the ground and distance from each other required to
produce a certain effect. With this purpose M. Servier proposes to
determine for any point of the road-surface, by the law of the squares
of the distances, the intensity of light, in terms of the Carcel
standard, which is spread at that point by one or more lights of given
power. Representing these intensities by proportional ordinates, the
extremities of these ordinates form an irregular surface, and the volume
contained between this surface and that of the roadway represents a
specific value equivalent to the total luminous intensity distributed
over the soil. In default of a better term, M. Servier calls this a
volume of _cubic Carcels_, a cubic Carcel being the intensity of a
Carcel (9·5 standard candles) multiplied by a square mètre of surface.
The different cases capable of being valued in this manner are as
follows:

1. A burner consuming 140 litres (5 cubic feet nearly), and of 1·1
Carcels (10·45 candles) illuminating power, placed at the height of 3
mètres (9 feet 6 inches). This burner gives at the foot of the
lamp-pillar a maximum intensity of 0·122 Carcel (1·159 candles), and at
10 mètres (32·8 feet) away the illuminating power is reduced to 0·01
Carcel (0·095 candle). The distance of 20 to 30 mètres kept between the
street lamps, even in the best-lighted towns, is therefore excessive,
for these should not be more than 13 mètres (14 yards) apart in order to
obtain between them the minimum illuminating power of 0·05 Carcel (0·475
candle), sufficient for enabling passengers to read.

2. The second case is that of a burner consuming 1400 litres (50 cubic
feet nearly) of gas, with an illuminating intensity of 14 Carcels (133
candles), placed at the height of 3·20 mètres; this being the class of
burner fixed in the Rue du Quatre Septembre. The intensity of light at
the foot of the lamp-pillar is 1·367 Carcels (13 candles nearly), and to
obtain the light of 0·05 Carcel (0·475 candle) already mentioned as the
least intensity enabling one to read, a point must be fixed in a circle
of 16 mètres radius from the lamp as a centre. Taking now a group of six
lamp-columns, three on each side of the street, and overlapping, as in
the Rue du Quatre Septembre, it will be found that the distribution of
light is defective. The most brilliantly lighted point at the foot of
the column has an intensity of 1·367 Carcels (13 candles), or more than
triple that of the darkest point, which has an intensity of 0·5 Carcel
(4·75 candles) at 4·58 mètres distance.

3. A lamp of 50-Carcel (475-candle) power, gas or electric, fixed at the
height of 8 mètres (26·24 feet). The illuminating intensity at the point
vertically under the light is reduced to 0·7 Carcel (6·65 candles); but
the light of 0·5 Carcel (4·75 candles) is to be found in a circle of 6
mètres radius from this point. It will therefore be observed that _the
distribution of light over the ground is better in proportion as the
luminous centre is higher_; but conversely also, _the amount of light
thrown on the ground is greater as the luminous centre is lower_. It
consequently results that the power of the light and its height should
be determined in every case with reference to the effect desired. The
method shortly described shows that, in the case of the lighting of the
Rue du Quatre Septembre, the mean amount of light per square mètre of
the roadway is 855 _décicarcel-cubes_, the best lighted parts having an
intensity of 1·62 cubic Carcels, and the darkest portions an intensity
of 0·50 cubic Carcel.

M. Servier has examined the question of lighting a street 20 mètres wide
and one or more kilomètres long, with the condition that the
illumination of the ground shall present a mean determinate quantity of
light per square mètre, or a given intensity at the darkest points. Some
interesting results are thus obtained. Thus, by substituting for the
14-Carcel (133-candle) lamps in the Rue du Quatre Septembre, burners of
50-Carcel (475-candle) power, with the condition of giving the same
intensity of 0·5 Carcel (4·75 candles) to the darkest points, a quantity
of light more considerable than before will be required. That is, a
greater number of Carcels (3000 as against 1848 per kilomètre in length)
will be necessary in the larger burners than were required in the
original smaller lamps. It is therefore imperative, in order that the
lighting shall be equally economical, that the unit of intensity--the
Carcel or candle power--shall be less costly in a lamp of 50 Carcel (or
475-candle power) than in the smaller lamps. By fixing lamps of
50-Carcel (475-candle) power in the centre of the street, instead of
along the side walks, maintaining the condition of giving the light of
0·5 Carcel (4·75 candles) in the darkest parts of the thoroughfares, it
is found that the pillars must be 8 mètres high and 20 mètres apart. The
best-lighted part of the road would then have the intensity of 1 Carcel
(9·5 candles), and would therefore be only twice as brilliantly lighted
as the darkest corner; the mean quantity light per square mètre would be
755 _décicarcel-cubes_.

Lastly, the same method of lighting has been applied to the “ordinary,”
as distinguished from the “luxurious” lighting of the public
thoroughfares, assumed to be 20 mètres wide, giving a light of 0·05
Carcel (0·475 candle) at the darkest points. With ordinary street
burners consuming 200 litres (7 cubic feet) of gas per hour, and giving
1·72-Carcel (16·34-candle) power, it is found that the lamps should be
18 mètres (20 yards nearly) apart, the burners being 3 mètres (9 feet 10
inches) high. With burners of 14-Carcel (133-candle) power placed at the
height of 3·20 mètres (10 feet 6 inches), the lamp-pillars would be 106
mètres (115 yards) apart. Or with lamps of 50-Carcel (475-candle) power
placed at a height of 8 mètres (26·24 feet), the distance between the
pillars may be increased to 270 mètres (494 yards).

In the case of electric lighting M. Servier has studied two
examples--the Jablochkoff candle, and an arc light (system not stated).
The former is credited with the illuminating power of 16 Carcels (152
candles), and is fixed at the height of 5 mètres (16 feet 3 inches), on
pillars 110 mètres (120 yards) apart. This would give a light of 0·65
Carcel (6·27 candles) at the foot of the pillar, and a minimum intensity
of 0·05 Carcel (0·475 candle) midway between the lights. The arc light
is purposely made exactly equal in computed efficiency to the larger
Siemens burner of 50 Carcels (475 candles). In the matter of expense,
however, using the data applicable to Paris, with 12-candle gas at 6_s._
6_d._ per 1000 cubic feet, M. Servier makes a striking comparison. The
cost of lighting a kilomètre of road in the “ordinary” manner last
described varies very little for the three classes of gas lamps--small,
large, and very powerful--included in the calculation, and ranges from
3·33 frs. to 3·96 frs. per hour. The cost of the same work done by the
Jablochkoff candle is estimated at about double, or 6·91 frs. per hour;
and with the arc light the cost would be 4 frs., or still higher than
with the most costly system of gas lighting, although less than the
expense of the Jablochkoff electric light.

The following table will show the particulars of different lights so
placed that persons may see to read ordinary print in any part of the
street, which may be taken as then being a well-lighted street.

  ----------------------+------------+---------+--------+---------+
                        |            |         |Distance|         |
                        |            |         |   of   |Number of|
                        |Illuminating|Height of| Lamps  |Lamps per|
  Description of Light. |   Power.   |  Lamps. | apart. |  Mile.  |
  ----------------------+------------+---------+--------+---------+
         _Gas._         |  candles.  | ft. in. | yards. |         |
  Batswing, 7 cubic feet|    16·34   |  9  10  |    20  |   176   |
  Cluster, 50   „    „  |   133·00   | 10   6  |   115  |    29   |
  Siemens, 100  „    „  |   475·00   | 26   3  |   294  |    10   |
                        |            |         |        |         |
      _Electricity_     |            |         |        |         |
  Jablochkoff candle    |   152·00   | 16   3  |   120  |    29   |
  Arc light             |   475·00   | 26   3  |   294  |    10   |
  ----------------------+------------+---------+--------+---------+

  ----------------------+------------+-----------+----------+----------
                        |            |           | Greatest |  Least
                        |   Total    |Consumption|Intensity |Intensity
                        |Illuminating|of Gas per | of Light | of Light
  Description of Light. |   Power.   |   Mile.   |on Ground.|on Ground.
  ----------------------+------------+-----------+----------+----------
         _Gas._         |  candles.  |  cub. ft. | candles. | candles.
  Batswing, 7 cubic feet|    2876    |    1232   |    2·15  |    0·47
  Cluster, 50   „    „  |    3857    |    1450   |   13·10  |    0·47
  Siemens, 100  „    „  |    4750    |    1000   |    7·46  |    0·47
                        |            |           |          |
      _Electricity_     |            |           |          |
  Jablochkoff candle    |    4408    |     ..    |    6·18  |    0·47
  Arc light             |    4750    |     ..    |    7·46  |    0·47
  ----------------------+------------+-----------+----------+----------

It must not be lost sight of, that the illuminating power of the gas in
Paris is very low, and is thus fixed. Under a pressure of 12 hundredths
of an inch, gas burning at the rate of 4·05 cubic feet per hour (or 115
litres) shall give a light of 9·5 standard sperm candles (or a “Carcel”
lamp burning 42 grammes of pure colza oil) per hour.

The competition which has been started by the electric lighting
companies has given a great impetus to gas lighting. A large number of
improved street gas lamp burners and lanterns having been invented and
brought into general use, the following particulars with reference to
some of those which were tried in the City of Exeter may be of use as a
comparison.

  --------------------+------------+-----------+------------------
                      |            |Consumption|  Cost per Hour,
                      |            | of gas in |gas being supplied
                      |Candle Power| cubic feet|at 3_s._ per 1000
  Description of Lamp.|  of Light. | per hour. |   cubic feet.
  --------------------+------------+-----------+------------------
                      |            |           |      pence.
  Ordinary street lamp|     15     |      5    |       ³⁄₁₆
  with batswing burner|            |           |
  Siemens’            |    330     |     50    |       1³⁄₄
    Ditto             |    130     |     25    |        ⁷⁄₈
    Ditto             |     45     |     10    |        ³⁄₈
  Sugg’s              |     50     |     16    |        ⁵⁄₈
    Ditto             |     30     |     10    |        ³⁄₈
  Bray’s              |     80     |     20    |        ³⁄₄
  --------------------+------------+-----------+------------------

Having thus far given a few facts upon lighting streets with coal gas, I
will now turn to the question of lighting them by means of electricity,
and in doing this the following points will be considered:

(1.) The motive-power to be employed in producing electricity and its
applicability for the purpose.

(2.) The description of machinery to be employed.

(3.) The value of the light produced, and its adaptability to the
requirements of any town.

(4.) The comparative cost of the electric light as compared with gas.

(1.) Whatever motive power is employed, whether water-power, steam or
gas, it is essential that it should be steady and unfailing; steady,
because the regularity and uniformity of the light depends upon the
evenness of the speed with which the power works, and unfailing, because
a stoppage means the immediate extinguishment of the lights:
electricity, unlike gas, is not stored after manufacture, but is used as
fast as it emanates from the producing power.[116]

Sensitive governors and careful bedding of the machinery greatly tend to
lessen unsteadiness, and are points of considerable importance.

(2.) The machinery consists of the dynamo machines, the conducting wires
and the lamps.

I will not here enter into the question of which is the best dynamo
machine to employ, as to discuss the merits of them all would involve a
large amount of space; but for this and other valuable information upon
the subject of electric lighting I will refer my readers to Mr. Hedges’
excellent little book entitled ‘Useful Information on Electric
Lighting,’[117] but the following points should be attended to. The
dynamo machine should be fixed in a dry place, and not be exposed to
dust or flyings, it should be kept perfectly clean, and its bearings
well oiled, its coils and conductors should be perfectly insulated, and
it should, where practicable, be fixed on an insulated bed. With regard
to the wires, the following ‘Regulations for the prevention of Fire
Risks arising from Electric Lighting,’ published by the Society of
Telegraph Engineers and of Electricians, are given in full, as they
leave nothing to be desired in the way of their careful selection and
fixing:

“(7.) Every switch or commutator used for turning the current on or off
should be constructed so that when it is moved and left to itself it
cannot permit of a permanent arc or of heating, and its stand should be
made of slate, stoneware, or some other incombustible substance.

“(8.) There should be in connection with the main circuit a safety fuse
constructed of easily fusible metal which would be melted if the current
attain any undue magnitude, and would thus cause the circuit to be
broken.

“(9.) Every part of the circuit should be so determined that the gauge
of wire to be used is properly proportioned to the currents it will have
to carry, and changes of circuit, from a larger to a smaller conductor,
should be sufficiently protected with suitable safety fuses, so that no
portion of the conductor should ever be allowed to attain a temperature
exceeding 150° F.

“N.B.--These fuses are of the very essence of safety. They should always
be enclosed in incombustible cases. Even if wires become perceptibly
warmed by the ordinary current, it is a proof that they are too small
for the work they have to do and that they ought to be replaced by
larger wires.

“(10.) Under ordinary circumstances complete metallic circuits should be
used, and the employment of gas or water pipes should in no case be
allowed.

“(11.) Where bare wire out of doors rests on insulating supports, it
should be coated with insulating material, such as india-rubber tape or
tube, for at least two feet on each side of the support.

“(12.) Bare wires passing over the tops of houses should never be less
than seven feet clear of any part of the roof, and they should
invariably be high enough, when crossing thoroughfares, to allow
fire-escapes to pass under them.

“(13.) It is most essential that the joints should be electrically and
mechanically perfect. One of the best joints is that shown in the
annexed sketches. The joint is whipped around with small wire, and the
whole mechanically united by solder.

[Illustration]

“(14.) The position of wires when underground should be efficiently
indicated, and they should be laid down so as to be easily inspected and
repaired.

“(15.) All wires used for indoor purposes should be efficiently
insulated.

“(16.) When these wires pass through roofs, floors, walls, or
partitions, or where they cross or are liable to touch metallic masses,
like iron girders or pipes, they should be thoroughly protected from
abrasion with each other, or with the metallic masses, by suitable
additional covering; and where they are liable to abrasion from any
cause or to the depredations of rats or mice, they should be efficiently
encased in some hard material.

“(17.) Where wires are put out of sight, as beneath flooring, they
should be thoroughly protected from mechanical injury, and their
position should be indicated.

“N.B.--The value of frequently testing the wires cannot be too strongly
urged. It is an operation skill in which is easily acquired and applied.
The escape of electricity cannot be detected by the sense of smell as
can gas, but it can be detected by apparatus far more certain and
delicate. Leakage not only means waste, but in the presence of moisture
it means destruction of the conductor and its insulating covering by
electric action.”

The lamps may take either the “arc” form, or the “incandescent.” The
former is produced by the electric current passing between carbon
points, and requires considerable electrical pressure; they give a light
of from 1500 to 4000 candle power; the mechanism of arc lamps has to be
of the most delicate kind to ensure the proper distance of the carbon
points being maintained. The lamps should be guarded by globes of
frosted glass, not only to prevent incandescent pieces of carbon from
falling, but to lessen the glare of the light. “Incandescent” lamps are
of small size, giving a light of from 8 to 50-candle power, which is
produced by the heating of a filament of carbon in a vacuum owing to the
resistance caused to the electric current by this contraction of the
conductor.

(3.) With regard to the value of the light produced, and its
adaptability to the requirements of any town, it will be seen on
reference to the opening of this chapter that at present considerable
doubt exists as to its adaptability for general public lighting, and as
each town varies in the length, straightness, and width of its streets,
the number of its large squares or confined courts and alleys, the
surveyor must use his own judgment as to the suitability of the light
before recommending his corporation to adopt it.

As to the value of the electric light, there can be no doubt that a most
brilliant and powerful light is produced by the voltaic arc: so
brilliant indeed, as to render it necessary to screen it nearly always
behind frosted or opalescent glass globes, the former being found to be
much the best for many reasons.

As to the photometrical value of the light, some considerable difficulty
has hitherto been experienced in obtaining accurate observations,
principally owing to the peculiar colour of the electric light, and also
from its fluctuating character; but these difficulties are being
steadily overcome, and with a photometer mounted on a light frame with
wheels, some excellent experiments have been made in the public streets
upon the comparative values of different lights.

(4.) The last and really one of the most important questions remaining
to be discussed is that of the cost of the electric light as compared
with gas.

With reference to the cost of the electric light, the following table
may be of use; it is compiled from an excellent paper on electric
lighting, by Mr. James N. Shoolbred:[118]

TABLE OF COMPARATIVE ESTIMATES OF FIRST OUTLAY AND OF WORKING EXPENSES
OF SOME SYSTEMS OF ELECTRIC LIGHTING.

  ----------------+------------------------------+
                  | First Cost, including Engine |
                  |         to drive it.         |
                  +------+-------+-------+-------+
                  | One  |  Two  | Three | Five  |
  Name of Machine.|light.|lights.|lights.|lights.|
  ----------------+------+-------+-------+-------+
                  |   £  |   £   |   £   |   £   |
  Gramme single   |      |       |       |       |
    light “A” with|  330 |  535  |  725  |  935  |
    Siemens lamp  |      |       |       |       |
                  |      |       |       |       |
  Cost per light  |   -- |   --  |   --  |   --  |
    per hour      |      |       |       |       |
                  |      |       |       |       |
  Siemens single  |      |       |       |       |
    light “medium”|      |       |       |       |
    with Siemens  |  365 |  611  |  835  | 1185  |
    small-sized   |      |       |       |       |
    lamp          |      |       |       |       |
                  |      |       |       |       |
  Cost per light  |   -- |   --  |   --  |   --  |
    per hour      |      |       |       |       |
  ----------------+------+-------+-------+-------+
                  |  Six lights. | Twenty lights.|
                  +--------------+---------------+
                  |       £      |        £      |
  Gramme “many    |              |               |
    light” machine|      576     |      1155     |
    with candles  |              |               |
                  |              |               |
  Cost per light  |       --     |       --      |
    per hour      |              |               |
  ----------------+--------------+---------------+

  ----------------+-----------------------------------------
                  |
                  |        Working Expenses per hour.
                  +-----------+---------+---------+---------
                  |    One    |   Two   |  Three  |  Five
  Name of Machine.|   light.  | lights. | lights. | lights.
  ----------------+-----------+---------+---------+---------
                  |_s._ _d._  |_s._ _d._|_s._ _d._|_s._ _d._
  Gramme single   |           |         |         |
    light “A” with| 1   6     | 2   1   | 2   7   | 3   0
    Siemens lamp  |           |         |         |
                  |           |         |         |
  Cost per light  | 1  11·4   | 1   4·8 | 1   2·2 | 0  10·2
    per hour      |           |         |         |
                  |           |         |         |
  Siemens single  |           |         |         |
    light “medium”|           |         |         |
    with Siemens  | 1 7¹⁄₂[119]| 2   4   | 2  10   | 3   9
    small-sized   |           |         |         |
    lamp          |           |         |         |
                  |           |         |         |
  Cost per light  | 2   1·4   | 1   6·8 | 1   3·84| 1   0·8
    per hour      |           |         |         |
  ----------------+-----------+---------+---------+---------
                  |     Six lights.     |   Twenty lights.
                  +---------------------+-------------------
                  |      _s._ _d._      |      _s._ _d._
  Gramme “many    |                     |
    light” machine|       2    8        |       6    3
    with candles  |                     |
                  |                     |
  Cost per light  |       0    6·4      |       0    4·2
    per hour      |                     |
  ----------------+---------------------+-------------------

Mr. Shoolbred has also given another table[120] of street lighting
which partly deals with the question of cost, it is as follows:

  -------------+--------+------+-------+------+--------+---------------
               |        |      |       |      |Illumi- |
               |        |      |       |      | nating |
               | Cost to|      | Annual|      |  Power |
               | Munic- |Length|  Cost |      |   of   |
               |  ipal  |  of  |  per  |  No. |each (on|
     Date of   | Author-|Street|mile of|  of  |hori-   |
    Lighting.  |  ity.  | Lit. |street.|Lamps.|zontal).|   Remarks.
  -------------+--------+------+-------+------+--------+---------------
               |        | yards|       |      |        |
               |        | line-|       |      |   can- |
               |    £   |  al. |    £  |      |  dles. |

                             CITY OF LONDON.
    _District No. 1._ (Ludgate Hill, &c.).--“Brush” Electric Light Co.

  Mar. 31, 1881|  660[A]| 1750 |   660 |32 arc|  9506  |1 40-light Brush
       to      |        |      |       |      |        |machine.
  Mar. 30, 1882|        |      |       |      |        |[A] Add £750 to
               |        |      |       |      |        |cost, for fixing
               |        |      |       |      |        |and final
               |        |      |       |      |        |removal of
               |        |      |       |      |        |apparatus.

               _District No. 2._ (King William Street, &c.).
                        --Siemens Bros. & Co., Ld.

  Mar. 31, 1881| 2270[B]| 1960 |  2026 | 6 arc|  4000  |6 continuous
       to      |        |      |       |23 arc|   330  |current ma-
  Mar. 30, 1882|        |      |       |      |        |chines.
               |        |      |       |      |        |2 alternating
               |        |      |       |      |        |ditto.
               |        |      |       |      |        |[B] Add £1450 to
               |        |      |       |      |        |cost, for fixing
               |        |      |       |      |        |and removal of
               |        |      |       |      |        |apparatus.

  _Metropolitan Board of Works_ (Thames Embankment).--“Jablochkoff” Co.

  Dec. 13, 1878|2¹⁄₂_d._| 2540 |  1131 |  60  |   380  |3 Gramme double-
       to      |   per  |      |       | can- |        |machine (“A” and
  June 30, 1881|  light |      |       | dles |        |divider).
               |   per  |      |       |      |        |1 Ransome’s
               |  hour. |      |       |      |        |steam engine. 20
               |        |      |       |      |        |HP nominal.
  July 1, 1881 |1¹⁄₂_d._|  ..  |   753 |      |        |
       to      |   per  |      |       |      |        |
  June 30, 1884|  light |      |       |      |        |
               |   per  |      |       |      |        |
               |  hour. |      |       |      |        |

   CITY OF NORWICH (Prince of Wales’ Road, &c.).--R. E. Crompton & Co.

  Aug. 15, 1881|  710   | 1700 |   531 | 5 arc|  2000  |4 Bürgin
       to      |        |      |       | 9 arc|   500  |machines.
  Jan. 31, 1883|        |      |       |      |        |1 Ransome’s
               |        |      |       |      |        |steam engine, 20
               |        |      |       |      |        |HP nominal.

                   _Chesterfield_ (Market Place, &c.).
                  --Brush (Hammond) Electric Light Co.

  Nov. 1, 1881 |  855   | 3500 |       |22 arc|   950  |2 40-Light
       to      |        |      |   ..  |100   |    16  |“Brush” ma-
  Oct. 31, 1882|        |      |       |Incan-|        |chines.
               |        |      |       |des-  |        |2 Fowler’s semi-
               |        |      |       |cent. |        |portable com-
               |        |      |       |      |        |pound engines 20
               |        |      |       |      |        |HP nominal.
  -------------+--------+------+-------+------+--------+----------------

As to the comparison of cost between the electric light and gas, this
has only, I believe, been properly estimated on the Thames Embankment,
London, by Sir Joseph Bazalgette, the results of whose investigations
upon this important point I shall give presently; it has, however, been
stated generally, and without contradiction, that arc lights can be
produced of about 2000 candle power, with 1 HP at a cost of from 3_d._
to 6_d._ per candle per annum of 4000 hours, gas costing from 1_s._
9_d._ to 3_s._ 6_d._ per candle according to the price of the gas.

Incandescent lamps cost 3_s._ to 4_s._ per candle per annum, as their
life is short, and only 200 candle power can be got from 1 HP.[121]

The latest investigations into the comparative cost of lighting by gas
and electricity upon the Victoria Embankment and Waterloo Bridge in
London, show that the lighting as effected by 96 gas burners for an
average of 12 hours burning all night, and 121 gas burners for 6 hours
lighted after the electric lights are put out, together with the
electric lighting 40 lights on the parapet of Embankment, and 10 on the
bridge, costs 834_l._ for the gas and 663_l._ for the electric light per
annum. Gas costing 3_s._ 2_d._ per 1000 cubic feet showed a cost of
nearly 1_s._ per hour for every 1000 candle power of light. The electric
lights cost 1¹⁄₂_d._ per light per hour, which is stated to represent
5·66 pence per 1000 candle power of light; each electric light as now
used, it is said, gives a photometric light of 265 candles, frosted
glass globes being found to pass much more light than the opalescent
globes.

These are by far the most important and reliable comparisons that have
hitherto been made, and it will be seen that the cost is in favour of
the electric light.

There is no doubt that the acme of all artificial lighting is the
prolongation of the light of day, and whether this is proposed to be
effected by electricity or gas, it should be the goal aimed at by all
who make this question their study.

  [112] Since writing these lines the following letter has appeared in
  the Standard and has never been refuted, which shows that electric
  lighting for streets is not yet all that can be desired:

  ELECTRIC LIGHTING.

  _To the Editor of the_ STANDARD.

  SIR,--At this time, when the question of lighting by means of
  electricity is receiving so much attention, and as Chesterfield is the
  only town in England whose lighting is done throughout by electricity,
  it may be interesting to your readers to know what our experience has
  been.

  I need not detail the stages which led to our abandoning gas, and
  taking up the electric light after being in darkness some months. I
  may briefly state that, after going carefully into the question, we
  decided to adopt the system whose praise was in everyone’s mouth a
  year ago, namely, “The Brush,” and, though we were applied to by other
  companies, we placed the execution of the work in the hands of the one
  that we considered the most suitable--the Hammond Company. During the
  negotiations of the contract, Mr. Hammond particularly pressed us not
  to stipulate for incandescent lamps, as he acknowledged that their
  Company were not in a position to cope with incandescent lighting for
  public purposes. We, however, decided upon the town being lighted with
  the Lane-Fox Incandescent Lamps, as well as the Brush Arc Lights.

  After waiting many weary months for the completion of the incandescent
  lighting, it is now, when declared by the contractors complete, in my
  opinion a decided failure. The Lane-Fox lamps, which have been
  supplied by the Brush Company, are most variable in their lighting
  power; whilst some are good, others only give a feeble light instead
  of a light equal to that of fifteen candles, as expected. The arc
  lights are doing good service in some of the large streets, but as a
  whole I think it has been fully demonstrated in a year’s trial in
  Chesterfield, that the field for arc lighting is very limited indeed.

  Though the tradesmen have been canvassed by the Hammond Company with a
  view to introducing the arc lights into their shops and hotels, in not
  one single case has the light been adopted. Indeed, it is evident to
  us who have them under our eyes every night, that they are only fit
  for lighting works and large, open spaces. The experience that has
  been thus gained at Chesterfield at the present juncture must be of
  value to all towns intending to adopt the electric light, and is my
  reason for troubling you with this letter, although I believe the time
  will shortly come when lighting by electricity may be advantageously
  adopted, both for public and private purposes.

  I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

  GEO. EDWD. GEE,
  _Alderman of the Borough of Chesterfield_.

  HIGH STREET, CHESTERFIELD, _October 10, 1882_.

  [113] The Surveyor of Folkestone says: “Sugg’s self-acting regulator
  is used, adjusted as nearly as may be practicable to consume 4 feet
  per hour, and so very satisfactory is this apparatus that for the last
  two years, after burning 7294 hours, it is found by the average meter
  to have consumed 29,227 feet, as against 29,176 feet as per regulator,
  being only 51 feet in excess of that which the apparatus is adjusted
  to consume.” _Vide_ Ellice Clark on gas in Public Streets,
  ‘Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and Sanitary Engineers
  and Surveyors,’ vol. ii. P. 193.

  [114] Bracket lamps may not be fixed by an urban authority to houses
  within their district without the previous consent of the owners of
  such houses. _Vide_ ‘Fitzgerald’s Public Health Act,’ third edition,
  p. 182.

  [115] Meeting of the ‘Société Technique de l’lndustrie du Gaz en
  France’ in 1882.

  [116] “Faure’s” batteries can store electricity, but at present this
  cannot be manipulated on a very large scale.

  [117] Published by Messrs. Spon, 16 Charing Cross, London.

  [118] _Vide_ ‘Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and Sanitary
  Engineers and Surveyors,’ vol. vi. p. 9 _et seq._

  [119] Siemens’ light at Blackburn cost 2_s._ per hour per lamp of 6000
  candle power.

  [120] _Vide_ ‘Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and Sanitary
  Engineers and Surveyors,’ vol. viii. p. 171, &c.

  [121] On this point Mr. W. G. Laws, Borough Engineer,
  Newcastle-upon-Tyne, says: “Taking as an example a street a mile long,
  lighted by the arc system, the arrangement would probably be lamps 60
  yards apart, placed alternately on either side, giving 30 lamps or
  60,000 candles at a cost of about 800_l._ per annum. If lighted by
  ‘incandescent lamps’ we should have them placed about 30 yards apart
  on both sides: that is, 120 lamps giving 2400 candles at a cost of
  about 420_l._ per annum. The number of gas lamps for the same distance
  might be 150, giving about 2250 candles at a cost of 300_l._ per
  annum.” (‘Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and Sanitary
  Engineers and Surveyors,’ vol. viii. p. 65.)




CHAPTER XIV.

STREET NAMING AND NUMBERING.


It was not until the commencement of the present century that
inconvenience was apparently felt from the want of any distinguishing
names of streets, or numbers to houses, either in London or provincial
towns; the first Act of Parliament on the subject being one passed in
the year 1819, which gave powers to vestries and district boards to put
up the names of streets, and even then for some considerable period
afterwards houses or premises were not marked with numbers, but with
distinguishing trade signs or names.

The Towns Improvement Clauses Act 1847, however, contains the following
clauses which are incorporated with the Public Health Act 1875, by the
160th section of that act:

“The commissioners shall from time to time cause the houses and
buildings in all or any of the streets[122] to be marked with numbers as
they think fit, and shall cause to be put up or painted on a conspicuous
part of some house, building or place at or near each end, corner, or
entrance of every such street the name by which such street is to be
known; and every person who destroys, pulls down, or defaces any such
number or name, or puts up any number or name different from the number
or name put up by the commissioners, shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding 40_s._ for every such offence” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, sec. 64).

“The occupiers of houses and other buildings in the streets shall mark
their houses with such numbers as the commissioners approve of, and
shall renew such numbers as often as they become obliterated, or
defaced; and every such occupier who fails within one week after notice
for that purpose from the commissioners to mark his house with a number
approved of by the commissioners, or to renew such number when
obliterated, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding 40_s._; and the
commissioners shall cause such numbers to be marked or to be renewed as
the case may require, and the expense thereof shall be repaid to them by
such occupier, and shall be recoverable as damages” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 34,
s. 65).

Some difference even now exists as to the manner in which streets are
named, there being considerable diversity in the sizes, colours, and
materials of the name plates, as well as in the spaces allowed for the
letters. The following list is given to show how this diversity existed
in the metropolis even so late as the year 1870.

Table taken from a “Memorandum by the Superintending Architect of the
Metropolitan Board of Works, relative to the enforcement of the Law
regulating the naming of Streets and numbering of Houses in the
Metropolis” (1871):

                                             Parish A.  Parish B.
  Names on houses at corners of streets        237        281
    „   on piers of railings                    24         36
    „   on iron plates                           6         44
    „   on wooden boards                        18         36
    „   on enamelled plates                      1          2
    „   impressed in terra cotta                 2          3
    „   in cement letters                       14          9
    „   in Minton’s china letters                2          1
    „   engraved on stone                        5         13
    „   on porcelain plates                      1          1
    „   with raised letters on iron girder       1
    „   on board on posts                                  11
    „   on zinc                                             2

And to this table are added the words “Some names are completely hidden
by vines, names given for ‘streets’ are put up as ‘roads.’” Since this
table was prepared however, the confusion has been rectified by the
energetic action of the Metropolitan Board of Works.

It is no doubt essential that for postal, telegraphic, and social
reasons there should be uniformity in the manner in which the naming and
numbering of streets is carried out, and the following particulars and
suggestions may be of use.

Names of streets should be marked up in such a manner as to be legible
both by day and lamp light, and the materials of which the name-plates
are composed should be of sufficient strength to prevent any damage
accruing to them from stone-throwing or other wilful or accidental
injury, or from the action of changes of temperature or climatic
influences of any kind, and the following list is given descriptive of
some of the modern methods of effecting this:


_Minton’s China Tiles._--These are white glazed china tiles 6 inches
square, on which either blue or black letters are burnt in, one letter
on each tile (except in the case of St. which is on one tile); they are
fixed by chasing them into walls of buildings, and setting them in
cement. They are the best description of name-plate with which I am
acquainted, their cost being only 6_d._ each, with the additional
advantages of being not easily broken, they can be removed and re-used
with facility, weather has no effect upon them, and they require no
attention whatever after they are once fixed.


_Cast-iron Plates with Embossed Letters._--These are generally painted
with a white ground, and black letters; they are liable to become
broken, and as they are fixed with screws these rust through in course
of time, when the plate may suddenly fall in a dangerous manner into the
street; another disadvantage is that they require to be painted about
once every three years.


_Painted Names on Walls of Buildings._--This method requires no special
mention; it is an economical plan and is more adopted than any other,
but the letters must be painted every three years at least, and they
are apt to be defaced if the premises are painted by the owner or
occupier.


_Enamelled Iron Plates._--These look very well, but they are apt to get
loose, and a blow from a stone will shiver them.


_Wooden or Metal Figures cut out and fastened on to Boards or against
Walls._--The same objection holds good with this method as with others
of the same description, the fastenings fail in time, and the name
disappears.


_Enamelled Glass Tablets in Street Lamps._--This is an excellent method
of recent introduction, and has many advantages. The name can be seen
very plainly either by day or night, no private premises have to be
interfered with in fixing them,[123] a uniformity of position or “where
to look” for the name of the street is secured, and there is no limit to
the number of times the name may be repeated.

Where the names of streets are placed against buildings the letters
which compose the name should not be less than 4 inches in height by 2
inches in breadth, with a space between each letter of not less than 1
inch; a light colour should always where practicable be used for the
back ground, and black or blue for the letters. One great objection to
painted letters is that they must be frequently repainted, and in order
to do this, ladders have to be raised against the building, which the
occupiers naturally object to without previous notice: it is always very
annoying to any citizen to have the head of a painter appearing outside
his bed-room window at any time, and more especially at an inconvenient
hour in the morning.

In selecting names for streets it is very important that they should not
be duplicated in a town, and also that there should be some sense in
their nomenclature; generally some local association can be found with
a family or historical name which is suitable for the street. Nothing is
more ridiculous than to see such names as Bath Street or York Road given
to streets which have as much association with such places as with
Jericho.

The street having been properly and conspicuously named, the next point
to consider is that of the manner in which it shall be numbered, there
being three methods in vogue by which this can be effected.

(1.) By allotting even numbers on one side of the street and odd numbers
on the other side.

(2.) By allotting consecutive numbers up one side of the street, and
down the other side.

(3.) By allotting corresponding numbers to both sides of the street,
which are distinguished by a prefix of north and south, or east and
west, as the case may require.

The first is by far the best method to pursue, for the following
reasons:

If the street is ever extended after being numbered, the sequence is in
no way disturbed. By this method any house can be more easily found, as
on reference to a directory it will at once be seen at which end of the
street it is situated. If the second method had been adopted this would
be impossible, except for the first few numbers, and where a street is
of considerable length with branch streets running into it this is of
the greatest importance. It is the best method also for the Post-Office
officials, as it facilitates the district sorting of the letters.

Giving each side of the street distinctive prefixes to its name, such as
north and south, &c., is evidently a bad plan, and leads to much
confusion.

In allotting numbers to premises in a street, if it has been already
numbered care should be taken to disturb existing numbers as little as
possible, for an altered number involves considerable expense as well as
inconvenience to the occupier of business or trade premises, owing to
the necessity of altering bill heads, letter paper, &c., and sometimes
even considerable trouble and expense in order to secure the validity of
the title.

Avoid numbering from right to left, and take care to allot sufficient
numbers to vacant spaces which may eventually be built upon, and to do
this the length of frontage may be divided into such lengths as (in the
surveyor’s judgment) will represent the new frontages. In any case it is
better to have too many numbers in a street than too few, and large
premises, and any public or other buildings which may be removed, and
other buildings substituted should have numbers allotted to them,
although it will not be necessary to serve the notices to have them
affixed. Most large shops prefer to have more than one number, although
I have heard the rather far-fetched contention urged, that more than one
number means extra rating.

Considerable care must be exercised to ensure that no separate premises
are passed over in allotting the numbers, often only a door or side
passage denoting the existence of another claimant for a number. Nothing
looks worse in a freshly numbered street than to see such numbers as 37A
or 96¹⁄₂ placed upon premises that should have had a distinct numeral,
and thus showing that they must have been left out.

The manner in which streets are numbered is generally as follows:

The town surveyor or one of his assistants walks through the street, and
with a piece of chalk legibly marks each house with its correct number,
taking care to observe the precautions I have enumerated; having done
this throughout its entire length, these numbers must be entered in a
book with the name of the occupier written opposite to the number. Upon
returning to the office the surveyor must then fill up and serve the
necessary notice upon each of these occupiers, the following being given
as a specimen of such notice:

  _Urban Sanitary Authority for the_           .

  TOWN SURVEYOR’S OFFICE,      188 .

  ____________

  I beg leave to give you notice, that the Town Council of       , as
  the Urban Sanitary Authority, have approved of the number        for
  the house in your occupation, in       .

  You are therefore required, within one week from the date of this
  notice [to obliterate the present number, and][124] to mark the said
  house with the number so approved of, and to renew the same from time
  to time in the case of its becoming obliterated.

  A penalty of 40_s._ will be incurred in the event of default in
  compliance with this notice.

  I am,

  Your obedient Servant,

  _________________________
  _Town Surveyor_.

  _To_ __________________

  _No._ __________________

In the event of the old number with which any premises were marked not
being obliterated by the occupier, the following notice may be served:

  _Urban Sanitary Authority for the_               .

  TOWN SURVEYOR’S OFFICE,      188 .

  ________________

  It has been reported to the Town Council that you have neglected to
  obliterate the old number of your premises, No.
  Street, after receiving notice of a new number being allotted to such
  premises by the Town Council, whereby you have incurred a penalty of
  40_s._

  The duplication of numbers in the same street was found to be the
  occasion of so much inconvenience, that the Council were obliged to
  re-number the street in question, and it is manifest that if a number
  allotted to another house is retained by you, the inconvenience sought
  to be removed will still remain.

  I am therefore instructed to inform you that unless the old number of
  your premises is obliterated within seven days from the date of this
  notice, proceedings will be taken against you for the recovery of the
  penalty incurred.

  Yours faithfully,

  ______________________
  _Town Surveyor_.

Of course, if nothing is done after service of this second notice, it
only remains to summon the offender as provided by the sections of the
Act, which I have given in the early part of this chapter.

  [122] “Street” includes any highway (not being a turnpike road), and
  any public bridge (not being a county bridge), and any road, lane,
  footway, square, court, alley, or passage, whether a thoroughfare or
  not. (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 4.)

  [123] The law apparently gives the Sanitary Authority power to fix
  names of streets against any premises they may choose, without first
  applying for or obtaining any consent from either the occupier or
  owner of such premises. (_Vide_ 10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, s. 64.)

  [124] If the premises have no existing number, these words can be left
  out.




CHAPTER XV.

BREAKING UP STREETS.


In nearly every city and town of the United Kingdom, except those where
the gas and water undertakings are the property of the urban authority,
the town surveyor is constantly annoyed by having some portions of his
streets broken up and greatly damaged by the action of the gas or water
companies of the district.

With regard to the lasting character of the damage caused to the street
by this disturbance of its surface, I shall have something to say in
this chapter, but it is first necessary to see what legal powers the
companies have to break up the streets, and what powers the surveyor has
to enforce the work being properly carried out.

It will be found that the sections bearing upon this point are almost
precisely similar in their wording in the following Acts:

“The Gas Works Clauses Act 1847” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 15).

“The Water Works Clauses Act 1847” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 17).

“The Electric Lighting Act 1882” (45 & 46 Vic. c. 56).

but with regard to the powers of the Government to lay telegraph and
telephone wires, &c., the clauses are different, and are contained in,

“The Telegraphs Act 1863” (26 & 27 Vic. c. 112).

As the clauses on this subject of “the Water Works Clauses Act” are
those which are incorporated with the Public Health Act 1875, I shall
select the sections from that Act, the first of importance being as
follows:

“The undertakers, under such superintendence as is hereinafter
specified, may open and break up the soil and pavement of the several
streets and bridges within the limits of the special Act, and may open
and break up any sewers, drains, or tunnels, within or under such
streets or bridges, and lay down and place within the same limits pipes,
conduits, service pipes, and other works, and engines, and from time to
time repair, alter, or remove the same, and for the purposes aforesaid
remove and use all earth and materials in and under such streets and
bridges, and do all other acts which the undertakers shall from time to
time deem necessary for supplying _water_[125] to the inhabitants of the
district included within the said limits; doing as little damage as can
be[126] in the execution of the powers hereby or by the special Act
granted, and making compensation for any damage which may be done in the
execution of such powers” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 17 s. 28).

The next clause deals only with the powers of laying pipes, &c., in
private property, and here it will be well to remark that if the water
undertaking is in the hands of the urban authority they have much more
power of entry for these purposes than companies possess (_Vide_ ss. 16,
18, 32, and 54, 38 & 39 Vic. c. 55), but this is a matter which does not
affect the questions dealt with in this chapter.

The next clause is upon the subject of giving the necessary notices, and
is as follows:

“Before the undertakers[127] open or break up any street, bridge, sewer,
drain, or tunnel, they shall give to the persons under whose control or
management the same may be, or to their clerk, surveyor, or other
officer, notice in writing of their intention to open or break up the
same, not less than three clear days before beginning such work, except
in cases of emergency arising from defects in any of the pipes or other
works, and then so soon as is possible after the beginning of the work
or the necessity for the same shall have arisen” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 17, s.
30).

The next clause is of great importance, as it gives the surveyor the
necessary powers to dictate the manner in which the interference with
his streets is to be conducted.

“No such street, bridge, sewer, drain, or tunnel shall, except in the
cases of emergency aforesaid, be opened or broken up except under the
superintendence of the persons having the control or management thereof,
or of their officer, and according to such plan[128] as shall be
approved of by such persons or their officer, or in case of any
difference respecting such plan, as shall be determined by two justices;
and such justices may, on the application of the persons having the
control or management of any such sewer or drain, or their officer,
require the undertakers to make such temporary or other works as they
may think necessary for guarding against any interruption of the
drainage during the execution of any works which interfere with any such
sewer or drain. Provided always, that if the persons having such control
or management as aforesaid, and their officer fail to attend at the time
fixed for the opening of any such street, bridge, sewer, drain, or
tunnel, after having such notice of the intention of the undertakers as
aforesaid, or shall not propose any plan for breaking up or opening the
same, or shall refuse or neglect to superintend the operation, the
undertakers may perform the work specified in such notice without the
superintendence of such persons or their officer” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 17,
s. 31).

There are several points to which it is necessary to draw attention
whilst considering the above clause. I am afraid that the “attendance”
of the surveyor “at the time fixed for the opening” or even of one of
his assistants could not always be managed, nor would it be practicable
to prepare a “plan” for every opening that might be made by a gas or
water company for new services, leaks in mains, &c.; but where it is
proposed to carry out any extensive works, such as laying a considerable
length of new main or removing an old one, it is certainly necessary
that there should be some “plan” of the manner in which such work is
proposed to be carried out by the company.

On referring to the clause it is evident that the first “plan” mentioned
must be prepared by and on behalf of the company proposing to carry out
the work, and this plan must show the exact position on each street of
the proposed excavations, and their depth, &c., which “shall be approved
of by such persons (having the control of the streets) or their
officer,” their officer really being the surveyor.

Lower down in the clause another “plan” is referred to in the following
words: “or shall not propose any plan for breaking up or opening the
same.” This plan, or more correctly speaking, a specification of the
manner in which the company shall proceed with the work, must be
prepared by the surveyor, and if it meets with the approval of his
corporation it can be enforced.

In order to assist town surveyors who may be required to act under this
clause, I now give a verbatim copy of a “plan” or specification under
which I compelled a gas company to work after they had given me the
usual statutory notice of their intention to break up certain
macadamised streets for the purpose of removing some disused mains.

  _Plan of the manner in which the              Gas Light and Coke
  Company shall take up and remove the old mains in        street,
  commencing at or near        street._

A trench to be excavated of not greater width than      inches and of no
greater length than      feet at a time.

Great care must be taken to keep the top facing metal separate from the
lower formation of the roadway, so that they may not become mixed
together; no metal is on any account to be removed from the street.

The mains must be taken up with all possible speed and instantly
conveyed away, without being allowed to remain at the sides of the
streets.[129]

The trench to be then at once filled in, care being taken to replace all
the materials of which the roadway is formed in their proper positions.
All extra filling in that may be required owing to the removal of the
mains shall be done on the surface with the best          stone, broken
so as to pass all ways through a ring of 2¹⁄₂ inches internal diameter,
the top of the trench being always kept flush with the surface contour
of the roadway. No earth, rubbish, or other material shall be allowed to
be brought on to the ground by the gas company for the purpose of
filling in, nor shall any material of any kind be allowed to be brought
from any other excavations that may be being made by the gas company in
other parts of the town for the purpose of laying or removing mains.

The filling in to be done in the proportion of one man filling to two
men ramming with punners of not less weight than      lbs. each. During
dry weather a plentiful supply of water must be allowed to run into the
trench whilst the filling in is in progress, for the purpose of
consolidating the ground.

The traffic must not in any case be impeded, and planks must be placed
across the excavations, where necessary, for the convenience of foot
passengers.

The work shall if necessary be suspended on market days, or any other
days that the surveyor may deem proper for the convenience of the
public.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next clause of the Act deals with the manner in which the companies
shall reinstate and make good the road or pavement, and is as follows:

“When the undertakers open or break up the road or pavement of any such
street, or bridge, or any sewer, drain, or tunnel, they shall with all
convenient speed complete the work for which the same shall be broken
up, and fill in the ground and reinstate and make good the road or
pavement, or the sewer, drain, or tunnel so opened or broken up, and
carry away the rubbish occasioned thereby; and shall at all times whilst
any road or pavement shall be so opened or broken up cause the same to
be fenced and guarded, and shall cause a light sufficient for the
warning of passengers to be set up, and kept there against every night
during which such road or pavement shall be continued open or broken up,
and shall after replacing and making good the road or pavement which
shall have been so broken up, keep the same in good repair for three
months thereafter, and such further time, if any, not being more than
twelve months in the whole, as the soil so broken up shall continue to
subside” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 17, s. 32).

The conditions embodied in the above clause are easier written than
carried out.

It is well known that a trench cut longitudinally through a street takes
a very long time to heal. Asphalte shows it the least if there is a good
backing of concrete, but all other pavements suffer considerably in the
process, as it is almost impossible to maintain their strict contour,
and with macadamised roadways the result is simply disastrous.

Opening a macadamised roadway does it more harm than the heaviest and
most persistent traffic, and it is surprising for what a length of time
the surface will show the treatment it has received.

It is unfortunately the practice generally for the men in the employ of
a gas or water company, after laying a pipe, to try and ram into the
trench all the material they have removed, without allowing for the
cubical contents taken up by the pipe, or if they do condescend to cart
anything away it is generally the metal, which they think will come in
nicely for the repairs of the trench during their liability for such
repairs. What ought to be done is that no filling of ordinary earth,
&c., should be allowed to come within at least six inches of the top of
the trench, which should then be filled in with good road metal, and as
this wears down it should be brought up to the proper level with more
metal. In the former plan a hump is seen over the trench, and this hump
is a mass of mixed dirt and road-metal for which there is no cure but
its entire removal to a depth of at least six inches, and the
substitution of good clean road-metal, which would have been the best
and most economical plan in the first place.

The clauses following those I have quoted are “penalty clauses” for
non-compliance with the provisions of the Act, and need not be here
given, but there is one more clause of the Water Works Clauses Act 1847,
dealing with the powers of private individuals to break up streets for
the purpose of laying service pipes, which it is necessary to give _in
extenso_.

On the question of similar powers to private individuals to break up
streets for drains, &c., I shall speak later on in this chapter:

“Any such owner or occupier may open or break up so much of the pavement
of any street as shall be between the pipe of the undertakers and his
house, building or premises, and any sewer or drain therein, for any
such purpose as aforesaid, doing as little damage as may be and making
compensation for any damage done in the execution of any such work;
provided always, that every such owner or occupier desiring to break up
the pavement of any street or any sewer or drain therein, shall be
subject to the same necessity of giving previous notice, and shall be
subject to the same control, restrictions, and obligations in and during
the time of breaking up the same, and also reinstating the same, and to
the same penalties for any delay in regard thereto, as the undertakers
are subject to by virtue of this or the special Act” (10 & 11 Vic. c.
17, s. 52).

It would also seem that the _consent_ of the urban authority must be
obtained (as well as notice given to them) before a street is broken up
(38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 149).

Very often, however, the companies prefer to execute all this work
themselves, as they do not like anyone else to interfere with their
mains or put in services which may be unfitted for the purpose;
consequently they give the necessary notices, execute the work
themselves, and charge the owner or occupier with the expense.

The powers under which streets are broken up for telegraphic or
telephonic purposes are, as I have previously stated, contained in the
“Telegraphs Act 1863,” the following being the clauses which refer to
this subject:

“The company shall not place a telegraph under any street within the
limits of the district over which the authority of the Metropolitan
Board of Works extends, or of any city or municipal borough or town
corporate, or of any town having a population of thirty thousand
inhabitants or upwards (according to the latest census), except with the
consent of the bodies having the control of the streets within such
respective limits” (26 & 27 Vic. c. 112, s. 9).

“Where the company has obtained consent to the placing, or by virtue of
the powers of the company under this Act intends to proceed with the
placing of a telegraph under a street or public road, the depth, course
and position at and in which the same is to be placed shall be settled
between the company and the following bodies:

“The body having the control of the street or public road.

“The body having the control of the sewerage or drainage thereunder.

“But if such settlement is not come to with any such body, the following
provisions shall take effect:

“(1.) The company may give to such body a notice specifying the depth,
course and position which the company desires.

“(2.) If the body to whom such notice is given does not, within 28 days
after the giving of such notice, give to the company a counter-notice
objecting to the proposal of the company, and specifying the depth,
course and position which such body desires, they shall be deemed to
have agreed to the proposal of the company.

“(3.) In the event of ultimate difference between the company and such
body, the depth, course and position shall be determined in England or
Ireland by two Justices, and in Scotland by two Justices or the Sheriff”
(26 & 27 Vic. c. 112, s. 10).

“Subject to any special stipulations made with a company by the body
having the control of a street or public road, and to any
determinations, orders, or directions of the Justices, or Sheriff, as
aforesaid, where the company proceeds to open or break up a street or
public road, the following provisions shall take effect.

“(1.) The company shall give to the bodies between whom respectively and
the company the depth, course and position of a telegraph under such
street or public road are hereinbefore required to be settled or
determined, notice of their intention to open or break up such street or
public road, specifying the time at which they will begin to do so, such
notice to be given in the case of an underground work ten days at least,
and in the case of an above-ground work five days at least before the
commencement of the work, except in case of emergency, in which case
notice of the work proposed shall be given as soon as may be after the
commencement thereof.

“(2.) The company shall not (save in case of emergency) open or break up
any street or public road except under the superintendence of the bodies
to whom respectively notice is by the present section required to be
given, unless such bodies respectively refuse or neglect to give such
superintendence at the time specified in the notice for the commencement
of the work or discontinue the same during the work.

“(3.) The company shall pay all reasonable expenses to which such bodies
respectively may be put on account of such superintendence” (26 & 27
Vic. c. 112, s. 17).

It will be seen by the above section that the time required before the
work is commenced after service of the notice is considerably longer
than that for gas or water mains or for electric lighting wires, and
subsection 3 authorises a payment for the services of the surveyor or
other officer attending to superintend the work, which is not the case
in the other Acts.

The next clauses are as follows:

“Subject to any such special stipulations as aforesaid, after the
company has opened or broken up a street or public road they shall be
under the following further obligations:

“(1.) They shall with all convenient speed complete the work on account
of which they opened or broke up the same, and fill in the ground and
make good the surface, and generally restore the street or public road
to as good a condition as that in which it was before being opened or
broken up, and carry away all rubbish occasioned thereby:

“(2.) They shall in the meantime cause the place where the street or
public road is opened or broken up to be fenced and watched, and to be
properly lighted at night:

“(3.) They shall pay all reasonable expenses of keeping the street or
public road in good repair for six months after the same is restored,
so far as such expenses may be increased by such opening or breaking up”
. . . (26 & 27 Vic. c. 112, s. 18).

“Whenever the permanent surface or soil of any street or public road is
broken up or opened by the company it shall be lawful for the body
having the control of the street or road, in case they think it
expedient so to do, to fill in the ground, and to make good the pavement
or surface or soil so broken up or opened, and to carry away the rubbish
occasioned thereby, instead of permitting such work to be done by the
company; and the cost and expenses of filling in such ground and making
good the pavement or soil so broken up or opened, shall be repaid on
demand to the body having the control of the street or road by the
company, and in default thereof may be recovered by the body having the
control of the street or road from the company, as a penalty is or may
be recoverable from the company” (26 & 27 Vic. c. 112, s. 19).

“The company shall not stop or impede traffic in any street or public
road, or into or out of any street or public road, further than is
necessary for the proper execution of their works. They shall not close
against traffic more than one third in width of any street or public
road or of any way opening into any street or public road at one time;
and in case two-thirds of such street or road are not wide enough to
allow two carriages to pass each other, they shall not occupy with their
works at one time more than fifty yards in length of the one-third
thereof except with the special consent of the body having the control
thereof” (26 & 27 Vic. c. 112, s. 20).

It will be seen that these are much more elaborate clauses, restricting
the rights of the telegraph companies than those of the gas and water
companies, &c., and as the Telegraphs Act containing these strict
clauses was passed in the year 1863 and the Water Works Clauses Act in
1847, it is fair to assume that the clauses of the Telegraphs Act 1863
were framed to meet certain objections to these clauses and upon
experience of their working, and are consequently better and more
adapted for the case in point.

To obviate all the difficulties and complications arising out of this
constant breaking up of streets, with the attendant inconvenience to the
public and damage to the surfaces of the roadways, it was suggested many
years ago that subways should be constructed under the surface of the
principal streets, in which should be placed all the gas and water mains
then existing.

There is no doubt that there are many advantages in this plan as well as
some disadvantages. It must be recollected that probably the subways
would have been constructed of sufficient capability to carry all the
mains and wires then existing, with a margin for future extensions of
size, but when we see the enormous growth of many towns, notably that of
the metropolis, and the consequent increase necessary in the number and
diameters of the mains, it is to be feared that sufficient space would
not have been left, and competition between rival gas and water
companies might consequently have been crippled.

Still there would be great convenience in many respects if all water and
gas mains, telegraph and telephone wires could be carried in subways, as
they would be easily accessible for repairs, and hidden leaks would be
unknown. With regard to the one great objection so constantly urged,
that in the case of a leaky gas main or service a most terrible and
damaging explosion might take place, it is true that this is a very
grave and serious objection, but it must also be recollected that
although this danger may be enhanced by the necessarily solid masonry of
which the subway is constructed, still there would be every precaution
taken to prevent leakage of gas, and in the present system liability to
explosion is not altogether remote. In Percy Street, Tottenham Court
Road, only a year or two ago, there was a terrible explosion in
trenches and mains which had become full of gas and atmospheric air in
the proportions of one volume of gas to fifteen volumes of air, and if
gas mains were laid in subways greater precautions would no doubt be
taken.

There would be also great danger in conveying the wires used for
electric lighting purposes in these subways, as they might fuse and thus
cause danger, and at all events they would have some considerably
disturbing influence upon the wires of the telegraph and telephone
systems, if laid too near.

I will now pass on to consider the powers of individuals to break the
surface of public streets for the purpose of putting new drains to their
premises or of repairing existing drains.

With regard to the former question I have given full particulars with
regard to new drains or connections with sewers in the chapter upon
“house drainage,” but with regard to the latter question it will be
necessary to make a few remarks.

There is no doubt that the public streets vest in the urban authority,
and it is contended that the following clause of the Public Health Act
1875 prevents any person from breaking up any street without their
permission, although it is sometimes questioned whether the words
“wilfully displaces” do not mean the doing of an illegal act, such as
taking up a stone in a street to annoy or injure a neighbour or from
sheer mischief, rather than that of a legal act for a proper purpose;
the clause in question is as follows:

“All streets being or which at any time become highways repairable by
the inhabitants at large within any urban district, and the pavement
stones and other materials thereof and all building implements and other
things provided for the purposes thereof, shall vest in and be under the
control of the urban authority. . . . Any person who without the consent
of the urban authority wilfully displaces or takes up, or who injures
the pavement, stones, materials, fences or posts of or the trees in any
such street, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five shillings
for every square foot of pavement, stones or other materials so
displaced taken up or injured; he shall also be liable in the case of
any injury to trees to pay to the local authority such amount of
compensation as the court may award” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 149).

Even, however, granting that application must be made before any
individual can break up a street, the urban authority would not be
likely to withhold their consent if it was for a legitimate purpose, and
having disturbed the street, a person must light and guard the opening,
and the “hole,” as it is called in the clauses following must be “filled
up or otherwise made secure;” but it is very doubtful if he can be
called upon to keep the surface of the road in repair for any length of
time, as can be done in the case of water and gas companies, &c.; the
following are the clauses in question:

“When any building materials, rubbish or other things are laid or any
hole made in any of the streets, whether the same be done by order of
the commissioners or not, the person causing such materials or other
things to be so laid or such hole to be made, shall at his own expense
cause a sufficient light to be fixed in a proper place upon or near the
same, and continue such light every night from sun-setting to sun-rising
while such materials or hole remain. And such person shall at his own
expense cause such materials or other things and such hole to be
sufficiently fenced and enclosed until such materials or other things
are removed or the hole filled up or otherwise made secure” . . . (10 &
11 Vic. c. 34, s. 81).

“In no case shall any such building materials or other things or such
hole be allowed to remain for any unnecessary time.” . . . (10 & 11 Vic.
c. 34, s. 82).

“If any building, or hole, or any other place near any street be for
want of sufficient repair, protection or inclosure, dangerous to the
passengers along such street, the commissioners shall cause the same to
be repaired, protected, or inclosed, so as to prevent danger therefrom,
and the expenses of such repair, protection, or inclosure shall be
repaid to the commissioners by the owner of the premises so repaired,
protected or inclosed, and shall be recoverable from him as damages” (10
& 11 Vic. c. 34, s. 83).

These three sections are incorporated in the Public Health Act 1875, by
38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 160, and the last clause undoubtedly gives power
to the urban authority to repair a “hole” which for want of “sufficient
repair” is “dangerous to passengers” but not otherwise, in however
unsightly a manner the trench may have been repaired.

The result of this uncertainty has been that a great many towns have
inserted in their private improvement Acts, clauses making it compulsory
upon all persons to give them from 3 to 7 days’ notice of their
intention to break up the streets, specifying the manner in which the
work shall be done, and also compelling them to deposit a sum of money
in order to secure that the repairs of the street are properly
executed.[130] A better method than this is to insert in any private
improvement Act a clause giving powers to the urban authority to execute
all drain-work themselves and charge it upon the owners of the property,
thus ensuring that any interference with the surface of the street shall
be done in a proper manner by men accustomed to the work, and also that
the drain itself shall be of perfect workmanship.

Where the town surveyor has no private improvement Act dealing with this
question, it is well to frame some regulations as to the manner in which
the notice of intention to break up the surface of the street shall be
given to him by the person intending to do the work, and if possible to
obtain a deposit of a few shillings as a guarantee that the surface of
the street shall be kept in something like decent repair. Although this
may not be strictly legal, it is a very universal practice amongst town
surveyors.

The following forms of notices are given as specimens of the description
of notice now in use, and are copied verbatim from those which are now
enforced in a very large borough in this country:

  _Borough of_             .

  TO THE BOROUGH SURVEYOR,

  I hereby apply for permission to break up the footway or roadway, and
  make excavations in             for the purpose of         , and I
  hereby undertake to light, watch and fence the place during the
  progress of the works, to temporarily make good the surface of the
  footway or roadway, to remove all rubbish, and to execute and complete
  the work to the satisfaction of the borough surveyor. I also deposit
  the sum of five shillings for the repair of the surface, and agree to
  pay the balance if it should cost more than that sum.

                                (Signature)

                                (Address)

  Witness and receiver           .

  Received by accountant        188 .

  Surface repaired        188 .

  At a cost of         .

  _Borough of_         .

               188 .

  To Mr.

  This is to certify that you have paid a deposit of five shillings, and
  that you are hereby permitted to take up the footway or roadway and
  make excavations in            for the purpose of          on the
  undertaking you have given to light, watch and fence the place during
  the progress of the works, to temporarily make good the surface of the
  footway or roadway, to remove all rubbish, and to execute and complete
  the work to the satisfaction of the borough surveyor; also that you
  will pay the balance if the surface repairs should cost more than the
  aforesaid sum of five shillings.

  ______________________________
  _Borough Surveyor._

  NOTE.--If the surface repairs should cost less than the deposited sum,
  the balance will be returned to you by the accountant, who will notify
  you of the fact.

  Notice must be given to the Building Inspector when the work is ready
  for inspection, and no drainage work must be covered up until it has
  been examined by the Inspector.

It may be well to add to this authority to break up the streets, the
following words--

“This authority may be revoked at any time if found necessary, and it
does not in any way relieve the person to whom it is granted from any
liabilities he may incur in respect of accidents from anything done in
pursuance thereof.”

In some towns the following custom prevails in regard to this question.

The person desirous of opening the street for the execution of any work
has to apply to the surveyor for a licence, and at the same time deposit
a sum sufficient to cover the expense of the work, such sum being
estimated and fixed by the surveyor. The corporation then supply one
labourer whilst the job is in hand, who, whilst working, takes care that
the soil is properly rammed and the surface made good; a mason is also
supplied to make any drainage or sewer connections. The deposit is kept
for about 3 months, and the cost of the labourer and mason, and of any
subsequent making good the surface of the street, is then deducted, and
the balance returned to the person who made the deposit.

This arrangement seems an excellent plan, and is said to work remarkably
well where it is in vogue, but whether it is strictly legal is open to
considerable question.

  [125] Or gas or electricity, as the case may be.

  [126] These words apply only to the manner of doing the work, not to
  alternative ways of doing it. (_Vide_ ‘Fitzgerald’s Public Health and
  Local Government Act, 1875,’ 3rd edition, p. 45.)

  [127] In the “Electric Lighting Act 1882,” the words “proceed to” have
  been inserted before the word open, which is an obvious improvement.

  [128] It is incumbent upon the undertakers intending to break up a
  road to communicate beforehand their proposed plan or method of
  executing the work to the road authority, and this in a sufficient
  manner to enable the road authority to judge whether what is proposed
  ought to be done without modification. The plan should, therefore,
  show the position on the road of the proposed excavation, and its
  depth. (Edgware Highway Board _v._ Colne Valley Water Company, 46 L.
  J. ch. 889.)

  [129] This precaution was necessary, as the smell of the old mains was
  naturally very offensive and a nuisance.

  [130] In some towns it is the practice to give the builder a junction
  pipe or block for nothing, thus ensuring his calling to give notice,
  but this is only successful in the case of new attachments to sewers,
  in which case the law is much more strict.




CHAPTER XVI.

OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS.


For convenience, I propose to treat in this chapter some subjects which,
strictly speaking, do not come under the head of “obstructions,” but
they are all questions which have to be considered by the town surveyor;
temporary obstructions and other offences with which it is the province
of the police to deal are omitted.

The following subjects will therefore be discussed:

(1.) Improving the line of frontages of streets.

(2.) Removing projections.

(3.) Doors and gates opening outwards.

(4.) Vault or cellar coverings.

(5.) Rain-water shutes and down-pipes.

(6.) Blinds or awnings over footpaths.

(7.) Trees over-hanging roadways.

(8.) Surface water from private premises running over footpaths.

(9.) Hoardings and scaffolds.

(10.) Dangerous buildings.

(1.) _Improving the Line of Frontages of Streets._--By the Towns
Improvement Clauses Act 1847, certain powers were granted which enabled
the commissioners to agree with owners of property to set back for the
purpose of widening any street,[131] but this was often found to be
difficult and wearisome of accomplishment, consequently in the Public
Health Act 1875, the following important clause bearing upon this point
was inserted.

“Where any house or building situated in any street in an urban
district, or the front thereof, has been taken down in order to be
rebuilt or altered, the urban authority may prescribe the line in which
any house or building, or the front thereof, to be built or rebuilt in
the same situation shall be erected, and such house or building or the
front thereof shall be erected in accordance therewith. The urban
authority shall pay or tender compensation to the owner or other person
immediately interested in such house or building for any loss or damage
he may sustain in consequence of his house or building being set back or
forward, the amount of such compensation in case of dispute to be
settled by arbitration in manner provided by this Act” (38 & 39 Vic. c.
55, s. 155).

This clause gives an excellent power to the sanitary authority,
especially in older towns, to lay down improved building lines upon the
plan of their town, and thus set back the line of buildings as
opportunity offers.

In assessing the value of compensation to be paid to the owner for
setting back his property, the following points should be considered:

(1.) The value of the area of the land given up to the public.

(2.) The loss of available and useful space to the premises.

(3.) If any use is made by the owner of the land given up to the public
by constructing cellars underneath, the amount of compensation should be
less.

(4.) The amount the owner will have to expend to make good the sides of
the neighbouring premises thus exposed by his setting back must be
considered.

A surveyor should be very careful to recollect if any building line has
been laid down in any street when the plans of new buildings are
deposited with him for approval. If these plans are approved without any
notice being given to the owner to set back, it is questionable whether
he can afterwards be called upon to do so.[132]

(2.) _Removing Projections of Buildings._--The Towns Improvement Clauses
Act 1847 made provision for setting back any house or building, or any
part which projected beyond the regular line of street when taken down,
on payment of compensation,[133] and this and the following sections
were incorporated in the general Public Health Act 1875.[134]

“The commissioners may give notice to the occupier[135] of any house or
building to remove or alter any porch, shed, projecting window, step,
cellar, cellar-door, or window, sign, sign-post, sign-iron, show-board,
window shutter, wall, gate, or fence, or any other obstruction or
projection erected or placed after the passing of the special Act,
against or in front of any house or building within the limits of the
special Act, and which is an obstruction to the safe and convenient
passage along any street, and such occupier shall within fourteen days
after the service of such notice upon him, remove such obstruction or
alter the same in such manner as shall have been directed by the
commissioners, and in default thereof shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding forty shillings; and the commissioners in such case may remove
such obstruction or projection, and the expense of such removal shall be
paid by the occupier so making default, and shall be recoverable as
damages; provided always, that except in the case in which such
obstructions or projections were made or put up by the occupier, such
occupier shall be entitled to deduct the expense of removing the same
from the rent payable by him to the owner of the house or building.”

The wall of a garden in front of a house, and shrubs in the garden,
which encroach on the street, come within the words “any other
obstruction” in this section.[136]

It is doubtful, however, if trade signs projecting at such a height as
not to be “an obstruction to the safe and convenient passage along any
street” can be removed under this section, however unsightly they may
be, nor does it appear that flag poles or flags can be ordered to be
removed when at such a height as to cause no obstruction.

The following clause, however, of the Public Health Act 1875 affects the
question of new projections much more closely.

“It shall not be lawful in any urban district, without the written
consent of the urban authority, to bring forward any house or building
forming part of any street or any part thereof, beyond the front wall of
the house or building on either side thereof, nor to build any addition
thereto beyond the front of the house or building on either side of the
same. Any person offending against this enactment shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding 40_s._ for every day during which the offence is
continued after written notice in this behalf from the urban authority”
(38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 156).

Here some difficulty is frequently experienced as to the question if the
building has really been brought beyond the common line of neighbouring
buildings, especially where the houses are detached; but it is
apparently left to the tribunal before whom the case is heard to decide
this point, and the surveyor can only give his evidence, as in many
other cases, to the best of his ability and knowledge, and trust to
obtaining a verdict in his favour.

With regard to obstructions erected before the passing of the special
Act, the commissioners may cause the same to be removed or altered as
they think fit--

“Provided that they give notice of such intended removal or alteration
to the occupier[137] of the house or building against or in front of
which such alteration or removal is begun; and if such obstructions or
projections shall have been lawfully made, they shall make reasonable
compensation to every person who suffers damage by such removal or
alteration.”[138]

Here the words “_reasonable_ compensation” are difficult of construction
and lead frequently to long litigation.

(3.) _Doors or Gates opening outwards._--

Section 71 of the Towns Improvement Clauses Act 1847 enacts that “All
doors, gates and bars put up after the passing of the special Act within
the limits thereof, and which open upon any street, shall be hung or
placed so as not to open outwards, except when in the case of public
buildings the commissioners allow such doors, gates or bars to be
otherwise hung or placed; and if (except as aforesaid) any such door,
gate or bar be hung or placed so as to open outwards on any street, the
occupier of such house, building, yard or land shall, within eight days
after notice from the commissioners to that effect, cause the same to be
altered so as not to open outwards; and in case he neglect so to do the
commissioners may make such alteration, and the expenses of such
alteration shall be paid to the commissioners by such occupier, and
shall be recoverable from him as damages, and he shall in addition be
liable to a penalty not exceeding 40_s._”

Section 72 of the same Act further enacts, “If any such door, gate or
bar was before the passing of the special Act hung so as to open
outwards upon any street, the commissioners may alter the same so that
no part thereof when open shall project over any public way.”

It is naturally necessary that doors or gates of all public buildings
should hang so as to open outwards, so as to give a free and easy exit
in case of panic, many serious accidents having arisen from a want of
this precaution; but with regard to private premises the case is
altogether different, and if doors and gates were allowed to open
outwards, they would soon become a dangerous and intolerable nuisance.

It will be seen that there are two courses to be pursued in connection
with this offence.

The first is where the door, gate or bar has been placed before the
passing of the Towns Improvement Clauses Act in 1847, in which case the
“commissioners may alter the same, so that no part thereof when open
shall project over any public way.” This duty of course rests with the
town surveyor, and in many cases it is not easy of execution, as
structural difficulties may have to be encountered and overcome.

In the second case, where the door, gate or bar has been placed since
the passing of the Act in 1847, certain penalties are incurred by the
occupier or owner, and the commissioners may also alter the door, gate
or bar at his expense.

The following specimen form of notice to be served in connection with a
case of this description may be of use:

  ____________ TOWN SURVEYOR’S OFFICE.

  SIR,

  I beg leave to give you notice that        of the premises in your
  occupation opens outwards, and when open, projects into the street
  called or known as                .

  I have therefore to require that you will be good enough to have such
           altered so that it shall not open outwards into the said
  street, within eight days next after your receipt of this notice.

  I beg leave also to give you notice that if you neglect to make the
  alteration required within the period specified by this notice, you
  render yourself liable to a penalty of 40_s._, and I shall proceed to
  make the necessary alterations, and recover the costs and penalties
  from you as the law directs.

  I am, Sir, your obedient Servant,

  ______________________________
  _Town Surveyor._

  To _______________

(4.) _Vault or Cellar Coverings._--

Section 73 of the Towns Improvement Clauses Act 1847 enacts, “When any
opening is made in any pavement or footpath within the limits of the
special Act, as an entrance into any vault or cellar, a door or covering
shall be made by the occupier[139] of such vault or cellar, of iron, or
such other materials, and in such manner as the commissioners direct,
and such door or covering shall from time to time be kept in good repair
by the occupier of such vault or cellar: and if such occupier do not
within a reasonable time make such door or covering, or if he make any
such door or covering contrary to the directions of the commissioners,
or if he do not keep the same when properly made in good repair, he
shall for every such offence be liable to a penalty not exceeding five
pounds.”

Besides the penalty, the person negligently leaving the covering in a
dangerous condition would be liable to an action for damages at the suit
of anyone who had sustained an injury in consequence of the covering
being so kept.[140]

There is another clause incorporated in the Public Health Act 1875 from
the Towns Police Clauses Act 1847 upon this subject, which is as
follows:

“Every person who leaves open any vault or cellar, or the entrance from
any street to any cellar or room underground, without a sufficient fence
or hand rail, or leaves defective the door, window or other covering of
any vault or cellar . . . . shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
40_s._ for each offence, or in the discretion of the justice before whom
he is convicted may be committed to prison, there to remain for a period
not exceeding 14 days” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 89, s. 28).

But the former section I have quoted is that upon which the town
surveyor generally acts.

In connection with this duty the following is given as a specimen
notice:

  SIR,

  I beg to call your attention to the fact that the door or covering to
  the vault or cellar in your occupation, No.                 Street, is
  not in good repair (and is slippery and dangerous to
  foot-passengers),[141] you are in consequence liable to a penalty of
  5_l._

  I must request you will be good enough to have such door or covering
  properly repaired and made good in accordance with the construction
  required by law, within days from the date hereof, and in the event of
  your failing to do so, proceedings will be taken to enforce the
  penalty to which you are liable without further notice.

  I am, your obedient Servant,
  ______________________________
  _Town Surveyor_.

  To _______________

In accordance with the provisions contained in the section of the Towns
Improvement Clauses Act 1847 which I have quoted, that the “door or
covering shall be made by the occupier of such vault or cellar of iron
or such other materials, and in such manner as the commissioners
direct,” most towns in this country have prescribed the size and
materials of which they shall be made, the size being often limited to 6
feet in length, by 20 inches projection, from the line of plynth of the
building, for cellar coverings or pavement lights as they are sometimes
called, and 12 inches in diameter for coal plates.

Hayward’s patent hexagonal and semiprismatic pavement lights, however,
have obviated the danger of slipping upon this description of covering,
and consequently little or no inconvenience is experienced, even if the
greater portion of the foot pavement is covered by them.[142]

Coalhole plates should be so firmly fixed as to prevent the possibility
of their shifting, even when the rebate of the flag stone into which
they are dropped is worn, and also to prevent mischievous persons from
raising them.

Here let me state that no person can without the written consent of the
urban authority cause “any vault, arch or cellar to be newly built or
constructed under the carriageway of any street” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s.
26); but from this section it does not appear illegal to construct a
vault, arch or cellar under the footpath, which would generally be the
extent to which such constructions would be extended. However, the more
general powers contained in section 149 of the same Act, by which all
“streets and the pavement stones and other materials thereof” vest in
and are under the control of the urban authority, give the necessary
powers to prevent the construction of cellars under any portion of the
foot-pavement without the consent of the urban authority.

The usual practice adopted is for any person who requires to construct a
cellar under the foot-pavement or carriageway of any street, to apply to
the urban authority for the necessary permission to do so. In granting
the permission, the urban authority call upon the owner of the premises
to which the proposed vault or cellar is attached, to enter into an
agreement acknowledging that the cellar or vault is only an easement,
and agreeing to remove the encroachment whenever called upon by the
urban authority to do so.

These agreements and any other similar easements should be kept together
in a book, which may be called the “Easement Book,” and indexed in such
a manner that a reference can be easily made at any time to any
easement that has been granted.

(5.) _Rain-water from Shutes or Down Pipes._--

Water may not be allowed to drip on to the pavements of the streets from
the adjoining houses, and the following clause from the Towns
Improvement Clauses Act 1847 has been incorporated with the Public
Health Act 1875:

“The occupier of every house or building in, adjoining, or near to any
street shall, within seven days next after service of an order of the
commissioners for that purpose, fit up and keep in good condition a
shoot or trough of the whole length of such house or building, and shall
connect the same either with a similar shoot on the adjoining house, or
with the pipe or trunk to be fixed to the front or side of such building
from the roof to the ground, to carry the water from the roof thereof in
such a manner that the water from such house or any portico or
projection therefrom shall not fall upon the persons passing along the
street or flow over the footpath; and in default of compliance with any
such order within the period aforesaid, such occupier shall be liable to
a penalty not exceeding 40_s._ for every day that he shall so make
default” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, s. 74).

In many private Town Improvement Acts, the cost of the repair necessary
under an order to do so from the urban authority may be deducted by the
occupier from the rent payable to the owner of the premises, thus
ensuring the work being done more quickly.

The following is a specimen notice to be served upon the occupier to
repair or put new shuting to his house:

  I beg to give you notice that the eaves, shuting, or projecting
  cornice[143] to the house or building No.          in your occupation,
  is out of repair. A penalty of 40_s._ will be incurred if this
  shuting be not repaired within seven days from the date of this notice
  (and under the Special Improvement Act the cost of such repair may be
  deducted from the rent payable to the owner).[144]

  I am, your obedient Servant,

  ______________________________
  _Town Surveyor_.

  To _______________

It is a common practice in most towns for the urban authority to provide
and fix trunks or troughs across their footpaths into which the down
pipes from the rain-water shutes can empty their contents.

(6.) _Blinds or Awnings over Footpaths._--

These may be dealt with as obstructions under sec. 69 of the Towns
Improvement Clauses Act 1847, which I have already quoted,[145] but they
are more particularly alluded to in the Police Clauses Act 1847 in the
following section:

“Every person who . . . places any blind, shade, covering, awning, or
other projection over or along any such footway, unless such blind,
shade, covering, awning or other projection is 8 feet in height at least
in every part thereof from the ground, shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding 40_s._ for each offence, &c.” . . . (10 & 11 Vic. c. 89, s.
28).

Thus legalising the fixing of shop-blinds, &c., provided they are at
least 8 feet in height and consequently no obstruction to the traffic.

In order to make the blinds or awnings sufficiently secure where they
are of large dimensions, it is very usual for the owner or occupier of
the premises to which the blind or awning is to be attached, to seek and
obtain the consent of the local authority to fix iron sockets in the
kerb of the footpath into which iron or wood standards are inserted for
the purpose of supporting the outer part of the blind or awning, and
there can be no objection to this practice provided that the work is
efficiently performed and to the satisfaction of the town surveyor.

(7.) _Trees overhanging Roadways._--

It used formerly to be considered by road surveyors and others[146] that
great injury was caused to roadways by overhanging branches of trees or
bushes, which were supposed to exclude the light and air from the
roadway and thus damage it, hence powers were given to local
authorities, as surveyors of highways, to compel occupiers of premises
adjoining the roadways to cut back and prune their trees or hedges in
order to prevent this damage. The following being the form of notice
usually adopted for this purpose:

  To ______________________________

  You are hereby required to cut, prune, and trim your hedges adjoining
  the highway leading from        to and also to cut down, prune, or lop
  the branches of trees, bushes and shrubs growing in or near such
  hedges and other fences adjoining thereto, in such manner that the
  said highway shall not be prejudiced by the shade thereof, and that
  the sun and wind may not be excluded therefrom. And you will further
  take notice, that if you shall neglect so to do within five days of
  the delivery hereof, I shall proceed to have the said hedges, trees,
  and bushes cut and pruned, according to the power and provisions of
  the various Acts of Parliament relating thereto. And further, that I
  shall also proceed to recover from you the penalties in this respect
  imposed by the said Acts of Parliament.

  Dated this        day of

  ____________________
  _Surveyor_.

It is however now very seldom that overhanging branches of trees or
hedges cause any damage to the roadways within an urban district, and
unless they are an actual obstruction to the traffic, the growth of
trees near urban roads and streets should be encouraged; indeed it is
now a common practice to plant trees close alongside the roadway, the
branches of which must of necessity hang over it, and cause no damage if
the roadway is properly formed and attended to.

(8.) _Surface Water from Private Premises running over Footpaths._--

It frequently happens that the rain-water which falls upon a front
garden or courtyard finds its way, for want of a sufficient drain, out
of the gate and across or along the public footpath, thus causing
annoyance to pedestrians even if it does no injury to the path. There
does not seem to be any clause in the Public Health Act 1875 to meet
this objection, for the section which I have given with reference to
rain-water shutes and down pipes (10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, s. 74), does not
apply to such cases, as it only refers to water from the “roof or any
portico or projection” and not to water falling upon the surface of a
garden or courtyard, nor is there anything in the Highways Acts which
can be brought to bear upon the subject.

If, however, any injury is caused to the footpath, no doubt the cause of
offence may be stopped or the perpetrator prosecuted or indicted in
default.

(9.) _Hoardings and Scaffolds._--

When buildings are in course of erection, or repairs are being carried
out to them, it is generally necessary that the person engaged in the
work should construct either a hoarding or inclosure, or at all events a
scaffold, so as to execute the work properly. Upon this point the
following clause of the Towns Improvement Clauses Act has been
incorporated with the Public Health Act 1875:

“Every person intending to build or take down any building within the
limits of the special Act, or to cause the same to be so done, or to
alter or repair the outward part of any such building, or to cause the
same to be so done, where any street or footway will be obstructed or
rendered inconvenient by means of such work, shall, before beginning the
same, cause sufficient hoards or fences to be put up in order to
separate the building where such works are being carried on from the
street, with a convenient platform and handrail if there be room enough,
to serve as a footway for passengers, outside of such hoard or fence,
and shall continue such hoard or fence with such platform and handrail
as aforesaid standing and in good condition, to the satisfaction of the
commissioners, during such times as the public safety or convenience
requires, and shall, in all cases in which it is necessary in order to
prevent accidents, cause the same to be sufficiently lighted during the
night.[147] And every such person who fails to put up such fence or
hoard or platform with such handrail as aforesaid, or to continue the
same respectively standing and in good condition as aforesaid, or who
does not, while the said hoard or fence is standing, keep the same
sufficiently lighted in the night, or who does not remove the same when
directed by the commissioners within a reasonable time afterwards, shall
for every such offence be liable to a penalty not exceeding 5_l._, and a
further penalty not exceeding 40_s._ for every day while such default is
continued” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, s. 80).

Hoardings and scaffoldings are now so scientifically erected as to be
little or no inconvenience to foot-passengers. Care must, however, be
taken to see that in the erection of a hoarding the doors or gates in it
shall not open outwards, and the police should be instructed to prevent
carts being backed in and left standing across the footpath.

The surveyor must exercise great discretion in the length of time he
allows a hoarding to remain; without undue hardship on the builder, he
must study at the same time the more important question of the public
convenience.

(10.) _Dangerous Buildings._--

This is the last, although by no means the least, of the series of
“obstructions” I have enumerated. Here, again, very grave responsibility
rests with the surveyor to determine what is a dangerous building, and
in what manner it shall be rendered safe and secure, for his opinion is
apparently legally conclusive on this matter.

The following is the clause of the Towns Improvement Clauses Act which
deals with ruinous or dangerous buildings:

“If any building or wall, or anything affixed thereon, within the limits
of the special Act, be deemed by the surveyor of the commissioners to be
in a ruinous state and dangerous to passengers or to the occupiers of
the neighbouring buildings, such surveyor shall immediately cause a
proper hoard or fence to be put up for the protection of
passengers,[148] and shall cause notice in writing to be given to the
owner of such building or wall, if he be known and resident within the
said limits, and shall also cause such notice to be put on the door or
other conspicuous part of the said premises, or otherwise to be given to
the occupier thereof, if any, requiring such owner or occupier forthwith
to take down, secure or repair such building, wall or other thing, as
the case shall require. And if such owner or occupier do not begin to
repair, take down or secure such building, wall or other thing, within
the space of three days after any such notice has been so given or put
up as aforesaid, and complete such repairs or taking down or securing as
speedily as the nature of the case will admit, the said surveyor may
make complaint thereof before two justices to order the owner, or in his
default the occupier (if any) of such building, wall, or other thing, to
take down, rebuild, repair or otherwise secure, to the satisfaction of
such surveyor, the same, or such part thereof as appears to them to be
in a dangerous state, within a time to be fixed by such justices. And in
case the same be not taken down, repaired, rebuilt or otherwise secured
within the time so limited, or if no owner or occupier can be found on
whom to serve such order, the commissioners shall with all convenient
speed cause all or so much of such building, wall, or other thing as
shall be in a ruinous condition and dangerous as aforesaid, to be taken
down, repaired, rebuilt or otherwise secured in such manner as shall be
requisite, and all the expenses of putting up every such fence, and of
taking down, repairing, rebuilding or securing such building, wall or
other thing shall be paid by the owner thereof” (10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, s.
75).

Great care must be observed in seeing that the notices are properly
prepared and served in accordance with sections 266 and 267 of the
Public Health Act 1875, and the town clerk, as the legal adviser of the
sanitary authority, should be consulted (in this as in all cases
requiring notices) by the surveyor.

It sometimes happens that a tall chimney shaft, wall, or other erection
may apparently be perfectly safe, whereas in a high gale of wind it may
be blown down.

Many tall chimney shafts rock in an alarming manner in a high wind,[149]
but he would be a bold surveyor who would order some of these expensive
structures to be pulled down in the face of the opposition he would
receive.[150]

A curious case of some difficulty in connection with dangerous buildings
has come under my notice, where a house was built with the approval of
the urban authority, and after completion and occupation the attention
of the surveyor was called to the fact that a large piece of rock at the
back of the house, from which the site had been excavated for the
purpose of its erection, was in a dangerous condition and likely to fall
at any moment and cause great damage to property, or even loss of life.
The clerk to the urban authority, when consulted, was of opinion that
the surveyor could do nothing in the matter, as the case was not met in
any way by the Act.

The following is given as a specimen notice to serve with reference to a
dangerous structure:

  NOTICE.

  _To_ (A)                                _the Owner of the ruinous and
  dangerous_ (B)                                _under-mentioned and the
  occupier thereof._

  Whereas a certain (B)          situated at          within the borough
  of         , in the county of       , is deemed by me, the
  undersigned, the surveyor of the mayor, aldermen and burgesses of the
  said borough of       , acting by the council as the urban sanitary
  authority for the same, to be in a ruinous state and dangerous to
  passengers or to the occupiers of neighbouring buildings:

  Therefore take notice, that you are hereby required, in pursuance of
  the provisions in that behalf of the Public Health Act 1875, and the
  Towns Improvement Clauses Act 1847, to take down, repair or secure the
  said (B).

  And that if you do not or if neither of you does begin to take down,
  repair, or secure the said (B)          within the space of three days
  after this notice has been served upon you or put upon the said
  premises, and complete such taking down, repairing or securing as
  speedily as the nature of the case will admit, I shall cause complaint
  thereof to be made before two justices in accordance with the
  provisions of the statutes aforesaid.

  Dated this        day of        18  .

  ____________________
  _Surveyor of the said Urban Sanitary Authority._

  A. The name and description of the owner or occupier, or the names,
  &c., of both should be here inserted.

  B. Building, wall, or anything affixed thereon.

Before closing this chapter upon “Obstructions in Streets” I give the
following clause from the “Towns Improvement Clauses Act,” which comes
after two other sections of the same Act principally dealing with
building materials, rubbish, or holes in streets, and although in this
clause the word “building” is used, the section cannot be taken as
referring to dangerous buildings, although it may undoubtedly be used
where it is required on account of waste land, &c., being left in an
unprotected and dangerous state:--

“If any building or hole or any other place near any street be, for want
of sufficient repair, protection or inclosure, dangerous to the
passengers along such street, the commissioners shall cause the same to
be repaired, protected or inclosed so as to prevent danger therefrom;
and the expense of such repair, protection or inclosure shall be repaid
to the commissioners by the owner of the premises so repaired,
protected or inclosed, and shall be recoverable from him as damages” (10
& 11 Vic. c. 34, s. 83).

I have purposely omitted any reference to temporary obstructions in the
streets, which are naturally subjects for the interference of the
police, but I think I have enumerated all those which require the
attention of the town surveyor.

  [131] _Vide_ 10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, s. 67.

  [132] _Vide_ Fitzgerald’s ‘Public Health and Local Government Act
  1875,’ 3rd edition, p. 166.

  [133] _Vide_ 10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, s. 68.

  [134] _Ibid._ ss. 69 and 70.

  [135] Or _Owners_, see s. 160, 38 & 39 Vic. c. 55.

  [136] _Vide_ Fitzgerald’s ‘Public Health and Local Government Act
  1875,’ 3rd edition, p. 174.

  [137] Or owner, see 38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 160.

  [138] Towns Improvement Clauses Act 1847, s. 70.

  [139] Or owner.

  [140] _Vide_ ‘Fitzgerald’s Public Health and Local Government Act
  1875,’ 3rd edition, p. 175.

  [141] Care must be taken that the mode of construction “directed by
  the commissioners” authorises this part of the notice.

  [142] In the City of London these patent lights have been fixed in the
  pavement round the whole of the frontage of Mansion House Buildings,
  at the corner of Queen Victoria Street, and also over the whole of the
  pavements in Draper’s Gardens, besides many other equally crowded
  thoroughfares, without the least inconvenience being experienced.

  [143] In the Act the words used are “shoot” and “trough.”

  [144] These words must be omitted if there is no special Improvement
  Act.

  [145] _Vide_ p. 176.

  [146] Sir Fred. Parnell in his celebrated work upon roads has the
  following paragraph upon this subject:--

  The great advantage of having a road perfectly exposed to the action
  of the sun and wind will be more accurately conceived by referring to
  writers of science on evaporation. Dr. Hailey states that one-tenth of
  an inch of the surface of the sea is raised per diem in vapour. He
  also says that the winds lick up the water somewhat faster than it
  exhales by the heat of the sun. Other writers say the dissipation of
  moisture is much accelerated by the agency of sweeping winds, the
  effects being sometimes augmented five to ten times.

  Trees are particularly injurious by not allowing the sun and wind to
  have free action on the surface of roads producing evaporation.
  Besides the benefit which a road receives from its drying rapidly by
  an open exposure to the atmosphere, there is another of great
  importance, namely, that of affording to horses the advantage of free
  respiration; for it is well known that the powers of a horse to
  perform work with ease, particularly when moving rapidly, depends upon
  the quantity of cool and fresh air that he can pass through his lungs.
  If the cause of horses tiring or becoming ill under their work be
  carefully examined into, it will often be found that it is not their
  muscles or limbs that fail them, but their wind; and therefore, it is
  particularly important to have a road so circumstanced that a horse
  may on all parts of it have the benefit of a free current of air.

  [147] No person can put up hoards or scaffolds in the streets without
  first obtaining the consent of the urban authority, _vide_ sections
  144 and 149 of the Public Health Act 1875. Many towns also have
  private improvement Acts with very binding clauses on this subject,
  empowering the surveyor to demand a fee for a licence to erect a
  hoarding, and empowering him to remove these after notice, &c.

  [148] This is scarcely ever feasible, or of the slightest use if done.

  [149] Mr. Cooper states that “a tall chimney will rock 1 inch in a
  moderate wind, and even to an extent of ¹⁄₈th of an inch at a distance
  of only 16 feet up from its base, and yet be safe.” (_Vide_ ‘Minutes
  of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,’ vol. xxvii. p.
  100.)

  [150] Whilst this work was in the press the terrible disaster arising
  from the falling of an immense chimney shaft at Bradford took place,
  the result of which was the death of upwards of forty persons and
  great destruction of property.




CHAPTER XVII.

IMPROVEMENT OF PRIVATE STREETS.


Prior to the passing of the Public Health Act 1875 the improvement of
private roads and streets was dealt with under section 69 of the Public
Health Act 1848, but the clause under which the town surveyor now works
is that which is so well known as the 150th section of the Public Health
Act 1875, and is as follows:

“Where any street within any urban district (not being a highway
repairable by the inhabitants at large) or the carriageway, footway, or
any other part of such street is not sewered, levelled, paved, metalled,
flagged, channelled and made good, or is not lighted to the satisfaction
of the urban authority, such authority may, by notice addressed to the
respective owners or occupiers of the premises fronting, adjoining or
abutting on such parts thereof as may require to be sewered, levelled,
paved, metalled, flagged or channelled, or to be lighted, require them
to sewer, level, pave, metal, flag, channel or make good, or to provide
proper means for lighting the same within a time to be specified in such
notice.

“Before giving such notice the urban authority shall cause plans and
sections of any structural works intended to be executed under this
section, and an estimate of the probable cost thereof, to be made under
the direction of their surveyor, such plans and sections to be on a
scale of not less than one inch for eighty-eight feet for a horizontal
plan, and on a scale of not less than one inch for ten feet for a
vertical section, and, in the case of a sewer, showing the depth of such
sewer below the surface of the ground: such plans, sections and
estimate shall be deposited in the office of the urban authority, and
shall be open at all reasonable hours for the inspection of all persons
interested therein during the time specified in such notice; and a
reference to such plans and sections in such notice shall be sufficient
without requiring any copy of such plans and sections to be annexed to
such notice.

If such notice is not complied with, the urban authority may, if they
think fit, execute the works mentioned or referred to therein; and may
recover in a summary manner the expenses incurred by them in so doing
from the owners in default, according to the frontage of their
respective premises, and in such proportion as is settled by the
surveyor of the urban authority, or (in case of dispute) by arbitration
in manner provided by this Act; or the urban authority may by order
declare the expenses so incurred to be private improvement expenses.

“The same proceedings may be taken and the same powers may be exercised
in respect of any street or road of which a part is or may be a public
footpath or repairable by the inhabitants at large, as fully as if the
whole of such street or road was a highway not repairable by the
inhabitants at large” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 150).

One has only to look at the number of footnotes that follow this clause
both in “Glenn” and “Fitzgerald” to see that it requires some
considerable interpretation. I propose in this chapter to call attention
to some of its engineering discrepancies and to point out the duties of
the town surveyor in connection with its enforcement.

First then, I conclude that it is the duty of the surveyor to call the
attention of the urban authority to the fact that any street within his
district (not being a highway repairable by the inhabitants at large) is
not “sewered, levelled, paved, &c.” but there is no express order for
him to do so, but with whoever this duty rests, it is no doubt the
surveyor’s duty to be certain that the street in question has never been
dedicated to the public or repaired at the cost of the rates, but is
really a private street within the meaning of the Act.

Before proceeding to give the manner of putting the 150th section into
force, it is necessary to draw attention to some of its wording.

The word “sewered” no doubt is also meant to include all drains both for
house sewage and surface water falling on the street, &c., and may be
used in the same comprehensive manner that the word “sewerage” is
generally employed.

“Levelled” is also rather a vague term, but it has been held to refer
only to the level or cross section of the street itself, there being no
power to charge the adjacent owners with the expense of altering the
level of the street so as to make it conform to a street with which it
connects. The word “formed” would in this case have therefore been a
more appropriate phrase.

“Paved, metalled, flagged, channelled and made good” are very precise
directions, but why both the words “paved” and “metalled” are used is
not clear. Is the paving to be placed on the top of the metalling or
vice versâ? It seems ludicrous to have used both words. The word
“kerbed” also ought no doubt to have been inserted, as no street either
urban or suburban can be formed without this necessary adjunct.

These very precise directions, if carried out in their entirety, would
cause great injustice to the adjacent owners of the property who had to
bear the expense, for although “paving” and “flagging” may be necessary
for streets situated in a town itself, they would be perfectly
unnecessary for a suburban road, and it is to this latter class of work
that the section is more frequently applied. There are generally very
few badly maintained private streets in the heart and busiest parts of a
town, much difference of opinion consequently exists in different
localities as to what the requirements shall be.

Some urban authorities insist that the roadways shall be paved with
granite setts or wood blocks, the footpaths being flagged or paved with
asphalte, while others are content with ordinary macadamised roadways
and gravelled paths.

There can be no doubt that the town surveyor must use considerable
discretion in deciding what class of work should be demanded, and he
must be greatly guided by the situation and requirements of the street
in question and the description and value of the adjoining property.

With reference to the words “or is not lighted,” my opinion is that
nearly all private streets are at once lighted by the urban authority
out of the rates, so soon as buildings are erected at its sides or it is
found necessary for the public convenience to do so. A reference to
section 161 of the Public Health Act 1875 will show that there is no
exclusion of private streets for that purpose, and for many obvious
reasons it is better that the urban authority should themselves
undertake this duty rather than throw it upon private individuals.

Having thus far drawn attention to some of the wording of the clause, it
is now necessary to discuss the duties of the town surveyor in
connection with it.

It will be seen that notice has to be addressed to the owners or
occupiers of “premises fronting, adjoining or abutting _on such parts
thereof_ as may require to be sewered, levelled, paved, &c.” It is often
found that although the greater portion of a certain private street may
be in a shocking state of repair, perhaps just a small length here and
there opposite portions of different frontages may not be so bad: for
instance, the path may be well gravelled and kerbed and a narrow channel
gutter inserted against a wretchedly constructed roadway. It is often
open to question if the owners of these properties against which these
partial improvements have been effected can expect to escape their
liability. If they can, it complicates still more the working of an
already greatly complicated clause.

“Before giving such notice the urban authority shall cause plans and
sections . . . to be made under the direction of their surveyor.”

This order involves some considerable amount of work. Very accurate
surveys must be made and plotted to a large scale, levels must be taken,
and where sewers have to be included in the notice it is often necessary
to extend the survey considerably, in order to make provision for future
extensions of streets or buildings or for the existing sewerage system.
The clause is very particular in stating that the “depth of such sewer
below the surface of the ground” must be shown, but no mention is made
about the size. The latter point being of quite as great importance it
would be thought as the depth, the question also at once arises, whether
the new sewer must be specified of such a size as only to meet the
requirements of the street alone, or may it be made of such an area as
will carry the sewage of a considerable district? It would be most
unjust to expect the owners of property to pay for a sewer larger than
was required for the street in respect of which they were responsible,
and if legal, the better plan would be for them to be charged with the
cost of such a sewer as would be sufficient for their purpose and let
any extra size that the surveyor found was requisite be paid for out of
the public rates.

It should be noted that in addition to the plans and sections “an
estimate of the probable cost” must also be prepared by the surveyor,
and this must be very carefully prepared, for it has been held to be a
“condition precedent to the recovery of the expenses, that such estimate
should have been properly made” (_Vide_ ‘Fitzgerald’ p. 160, 3rd
edition).

No mention is however made in the Act of a specification, which is of
course absolutely essential.

It may here be of use if I give a specimen form of notice to be served
in connection with carrying out the duties involved by this clause; of
course each town surveyor must alter the work specified to meet the
requirements of the case;

  _To the Owner or Owners of certain premises fronting, adjoining, or
  abutting upon a certain street, called              in the parish of
           in the borough of            in the county of         _

  Whereas the said street is not levelled, paved, metalled, channelled
  and made good to the satisfaction of the mayor, aldermen and burgesses
  of         , the urban sanitary authority of the above-named borough:

  And whereas your said premises front, adjoin, or abut on certain parts
  of the said street which requires to be levelled, paved, metalled,
  channelled and made good as aforesaid:

  Now therefore, the mayor, aldermen and burgesses of         , the
  urban sanitary authority of the said borough as aforesaid, hereby give
  you notice (in pursuance of the statute in that case made and
  provided) to level, pave, metal, channel and make good the portion of
  the said street in which your said premises front, adjoin, or abut as
  aforesaid, within the space of one month from the date hereof, in
  manner following, that is to say:

  (_If a sewer is to be formed, fill in this first._)

  The carriage-way and water tables thereof to be formed in the mode,
  according to the sections, and on the levels and at the rates of
  inclination shown upon the plan, sections, and in accordance with the
  specification of the work prepared by the surveyor to the said urban
  sanitary authority, and now open for public inspection at his office,
           during the usual office hours.

  The carriage-way to be bottomed, formed, and carefully levelled up to
  the form shown by the said sections; and in the following manner:

  (_Here fill in specification of method._)

  Construct        gullies, fitted with five-bar cast-iron gratings and
  frames of the form and pattern to be seen at         , these gullies
  to be placed in such positions as are shown on the aforesaid plan and
  sections; each gully to have a six-inch glazed stoneware socket-pipe
  drain connecting it with the sewer, to be laid on a solid bed, and at
  an uniform inclination from gully to sewer, with joints made of neat
  Portland cement.

  The existing kerb to be taken up and replaced by        inches by
         inches granite kerb in lengths of not less than        inches,
  to the lines shown on plan, and to the levels marked on sections.

  The water-tables or gutter to be channelled        with properly laid,
  and bedded on fine gravel to the levels and inclinations marked on
  sections.

  The footpaths shall be properly formed, bottomed, and drained where
  required; the formation level made to the inclination shown on
  section, and afterwards coated with       .

  The whole of the above-mentioned works to be executed by you in
  accordance with the plan and sections hereinbefore referred to and now
  open for inspection at the surveyor’s office as aforesaid, and of the
  dimensions, widths and levels shown thereon, and to be done in a good,
  workmanlike and substantial manner, to the satisfaction of the said
  urban sanitary authority and of their surveyor.

  An estimate of the probable cost of the said work, prepared under the
  direction of the surveyor to the said urban sanitary authority, is
  also lying for inspection at the office of the said surveyor, in
  manner required by section 150 of the Public Health Act 1875.

  Dated this        day of        18  .

  ____________________
  _Town Clerk_.

The clause then goes on to say “If such notice is not complied with.”

It would be a most difficult and costly proceeding for any individual
owner of property to execute the work for half the width of the street
opposite his length of frontage, and the result would be anything but
satisfactory if the owners of the properties were to comply with the
notices in this manner.

If the owners do intend to comply with the notice, and carry out the
work themselves, the best method for them to adopt is to hold a meeting
and decide upon having it done, then to appoint one of their number, or
some other person to superintend or carry out the work, and afterwards
collect the money, but this is very seldom done, and the wisest course
(which is generally adopted) is not to comply with the notice, but let
the urban authority execute the work themselves. This again entails
considerable labour upon the town surveyor, who has to superintend the
work and see that all the details contained in the statutory notices are
properly carried out, but his labour does not end here. Upon the
completion of the work the amount expended has to be recovered “from the
owners in default according to the frontage of their respective
premises, and in such proportion as is settled by the surveyor of the
urban authority, or (in case of dispute) by arbitration.”

It is scarcely necessary to point out what an immense amount of
responsible work this involves. First, a separate account of all the
labour and materials employed on the street must be most carefully kept
and totalled at the end of the work, with such additional sum for
supervision, &c., as the urban authority may think necessary.[151] The
exact length of each property “fronting, adjoining or abutting” on the
street, must be most carefully measured. A proportionate sum has then to
be calculated for each of these, and this sum is often complicated by
cross roads, cul-de-sacs, narrow passages, strips of land intervening
between the street and the properties, and many other perplexing
intricacies, in addition to those persons who are legally exempted from
any payment under the following clause of the Public Health Act 1875:

“The incumbent or minister of any church, chapel, or place appropriated
to public religious worship, which is now by law exempt from rates for
the relief of the poor, shall not be liable to any expenses under the
last preceding section as the owner or occupier of such church, chapel,
or place, or of any churchyard or burial ground attached thereto, nor
shall any such expenses be deemed to be a charge on such church, chapel
or other place, or on such churchyard or burial ground . . .” (38 & 39
Vic. c. 55, s. 151.).

The town surveyor, having ascertained what is the amount of the sum due
from each owner, shall proceed to fill in the amount upon a form a
specimen of which is now given:

  _To the Owner of certain premises fronting, adjoining or abutting upon
  a certain street called          in the parish of          in the
  borough of          in the county of         _

  Whereas the mayor, aldermen and burgesses of the urban sanitary
  authority for the said         , by a notice in writing pursuant to
  the statute in that behalf made and provided, dated the        day of
        , 18  , required you being the owner of certain premises
  fronting, adjoining or abutting upon a street or highway called
          , within the said          (and not being a street or highway
  repairable by the inhabitants at large) to level, pave, metal, channel
  and make good the said street or highway within the time and in the
  manner specified in the said notice, and according to the plans and
  sections deposited at the office of the surveyor to the said urban
  sanitary authority at         :

  And whereas the said notice not having been complied with by you
  within the time limited by the said notice, the said urban sanitary
  authority have executed the works mentioned or referred to therein:

  And whereas the expenses incurred by the said urban sanitary authority
  in levelling, paving, metalling, channelling and making good the said
  street, amount to          pounds        shillings and        pence:

  Wherefore take notice that I the undersigned, being the surveyor of
  the said urban sanitary authority, in pursuance of the statutes in
  that case made and provided, do hereby apportion the sum of
  pounds,        shillings and        pence as the proportion of the
  said sum of        pounds,        shillings and        pence, to be
  paid by you as such owner aforesaid, such apportionment being
  according to the frontage of your said premises, fronting, adjoining
  or abutting upon the said street or highway.

  Further take notice that the aforesaid apportionment will be binding
  and conclusive upon you unless within the period of three months from
  the day of the date of this notice you shall by written notice to the
  said urban sanitary authority dispute the same.

  Dated this          day of       , 18  .

  ______________________________
  _Surveyor to the said Urban Sanitary Authority._

  ______________________________
  _Clerk of the said Urban Sanitary Authority._

There seems to be no power on the part of any owner to dispute the
question as to whether the works carried out have been necessary or not,
or whether the cost of the works have been excessive; the only point
upon which they can go to arbitration is that as to whether the
proportion settled by the surveyor is accurate or not, and this point
the arbitrator is left to decide.

It must not be lost sight of that there is a clause in the Public Health
Act 1875, which makes the expenses so settled by the surveyor very
binding upon the owner of the property in question, unless he appeals
within three months from the service of the notice, as the following
extract from the clause will show:

. . . “Where such expenses have been settled and apportioned by the
surveyor of the local authority as payable by such owner, such
apportionment shall be binding and conclusive on such owner, unless
within three months from service of notice on him by the local authority
or their surveyor of the amount settled by the surveyor to be due from
such owner, he shall by written notice dispute the same” . . . (38 & 39
Vic. c. 55, s. 257)[152] and it must also be borne in mind that the
person from whom these expenses may be recovered “is the owner of the
premises at the time when the work was done, not the owner to whom
notice requiring the work to be done may be given” (_vide_ Fitzgerald’s
Public Health Act, p. 301, 3rd edition); so that the town surveyor must
be very careful to make sure that any of the property abutting on the
street has not changed hands before he commences the work.

After the 150th section of the Public Health Act has been carried out
and a private street has been thus put into thorough repair, the urban
authority may take possession of it and declare it to be a highway
repairable by the inhabitants at large; the following section of the Act
gives the modus operandi necessary to effect this:

“When any street within any urban district, not being a highway
repairable by the inhabitants at large, has been sewered, levelled,
paved, flagged, metalled, channelled and made good and provided with
proper means of lighting to the satisfaction of the urban authority,
such authority may if they think fit, by notice in writing put up in any
part of the street, declare the same to be a highway, and thereupon the
same shall become a highway repairable by the inhabitants at large, and
every such notice shall be entered among the proceedings of the urban
authority.

“Provided that no such street shall become a highway so repairable if
within one month after such notice has been put up, the proprietor or
the majority in number of proprietors of such street, by notice in
writing to the urban authority, object thereto, and in ascertaining such
majority, joint proprietors shall be reckoned as one proprietor” (38 &
39 Vic. c. 55, s. 152).

The necessary notices in conformity with this section are usually
prepared by the town clerk, so that the town surveyor has nothing to do
with this proceeding except to maintain the street after it has been
declared a highway repairable by the inhabitants at large, in the same
manner as he does the rest of the public streets within his district.

There is still one other clause of the Public Health Act 1875, which
deals with the question of private roads, and it is as follows:

“Any urban authority may agree with any person for the making of roads
within their district for the public use through the lands and at the
expense of such person, and may agree that such roads shall become and
the same shall accordingly become on completion, highways maintainable
and repairable by the inhabitants at large within their district; they
may also with the consent of two-thirds of their number agree with such
person to pay and may accordingly pay any portion of the expenses of
making such roads” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 146).

This clause is very explicit and requires no comment, it would however
be much better for the urban authority in contemplating a case of this
description to execute the necessary works themselves and agree with the
person about the expense, for if they are intended to be afterwards
taken over it is to be feared that the roads would be very improperly
constructed in the first place by the person intending to hand them
over. It must be noted that the word “roads” is used in the above clause
instead of “streets” as in the other clauses I have quoted, and also
that the word “maintainable” is added to repairable.

Street is the term legally used in the Public Health Act 1875, and is
thus defined:

“Street includes any highway (not being a turnpike road) and any public
bridge (not being a county bridge), and any road, lane, footway, square,
court, alley or passage, whether a thoroughfare or not” (38 & 39 Vic. c.
55, s. 4.) so that whereas in the 150th section of the Public Health Act
1875, any of the above can be dealt with, it is only open for the urban
authority to deal with roads under the 146th section of the Act, and it
is sometimes rather difficult to define a road for the purposes of the
latter section.

  [151] In some districts the urban authority make an additional charge
  of 5 per cent. upon the total outlay to cover the cost of preliminary
  surveys and supervision of the work by their surveyor; this 5 per
  cent., however, is not paid to him, but is paid to the city treasurer,
  and thus becomes a set off against his salary.

  [152] See also 38 & 39 Vict. c. 55, s. 268, where a person who deems
  himself aggrieved may memorialise the Local Government Board, &c.




CHAPTER XVIII.

NEW STREETS AND BUILDINGS.


One of the most important duties devolving upon a “town surveyor” is
that of exercising control over any new streets that may be constructed,
or any new buildings that may be erected, within the limits of his
jurisdiction.

This duty is imposed on him by the following clause of the Public Health
Act 1875:

“Every urban authority may make byelaws with respect to the following
matters; (that is to say,)

“(1.) With respect to the level, width and construction of new streets,
and the provisions for the sewerage thereof;

“(2.) With respect to the structure of walls, foundations, roofs, and
chimneys of new buildings, for securing stability and the prevention of
fires, and for purposes of health;

“(3.) With respect to the sufficiency of the space about buildings to
secure a free circulation of air, and with respect to the ventilation of
buildings;

“(4.) With respect to the drainage of buildings, to waterclosets, earth
closets, privies, ashpits, and cesspools, in connexion with buildings,
and to the closing of buildings or parts of buildings unfit for human
habitation, and to prohibition of their use for such habitation;

“And they may further provide for the observance of such byelaws by
enacting therein such provisions as they think necessary as to the
giving of notices; as to the deposit of plans and sections by persons
intending to lay out streets or to construct buildings; as to inspection
by the urban authority, and as to the power of such authority (subject
to the provisions of this Act) to remove, alter, or pull down any work
begun or done in contravention of such byelaws. Provided that no byelaw
made under this section shall affect any building erected in any place
(which at the time of the passing of this Act is included in an urban
sanitary district) before the Local Government Acts came into force in
such place, or any building erected in any place (which at the time of
the passing of this Act is not included in an urban sanitary district)
before such place becomes constituted or included in an urban district,
or by virtue of any order of the Local Government Board subject to this
enactment.

“The provisions of this section, and of the two last preceding sections,
shall not apply to buildings belonging to any railway company, and used
for the purposes of such railway under any Act of Parliament” (38 & 39
Vic. c. 55, s. 157).

The result of this power having been so given to urban authorities, is
that they have all framed sets of byelaws, which having received the
sanction of the Local Government Board, are now law in the several
districts.

In the year 1877, it being found that considerable variation existed in
the requirements set forth in the byelaws, according to the districts
from which they emanated, and experience having shown that the forms of
byelaws previously issued by the Local Government Board were inadequate,
the Local Government Board in order to assist urban authorities issued a
series of model byelaws; amongst the series being a set of byelaws
regulating the manner in which new streets should be constructed and
buildings erected.[153]

These model byelaws are too extensive to give in detail, as they contain
99 clauses, but every town surveyor should at once procure a copy, even
if his corporation have not adopted them, nor intend to do so.

One of the first difficulties that often presents itself to those who
have to enforce the observance of the necessary “giving of notices and
deposit of plans and sections by persons intending to construct new
buildings” is to prove that the building is “new” so as to bring it
under the operations of the Act.

In many cases, of course, there can be no doubt where bare land is being
built upon, but often after buildings have been partially destroyed by
fire, or where extensive alterations are being carried out, some
considerable elements of uncertainty as to what is a “new building” are
introduced.

The law attempts to settle the question as follows:

“For the purposes of this Act, the re-erecting of any building pulled
down to, or below the ground floor, or of any frame-building of which
only the frame-work is left down to the ground floor, or the conversion
into a dwelling house of any building not originally constructed for
human habitation, or the conversion into more than one dwelling house of
a building originally constructed as one dwelling house only, shall be
considered the erection of a new building” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 159).

But the difficulty at once presents itself as to what is meant by the
words “ground floor.” Does this mean the actual floor level, or the
cubical space contained by the walls, floor and ceiling of the “ground
floor” (or as it is sometimes called “ground story”) of the building?
The latter may be assumed to be the correct interpretation, for if we
order a man to hang a picture, or to fix a chandelier on the “ground
floor,” we certainly do not expect to find them placed upon the floor.

It is important that this point should be settled definitely, or some
more explanatory term employed in the Act in order to determine what is
a new building, for in the present state of uncertainty it may be urged
that the whole building must be razed to the ground, whereas if the
proper meaning of “ground floor” is taken, would the removal of the
superstructure and destruction of the ceiling only of the “ground
floor” bring the new work under the definition of a new building and
within the operation of the byelaws?

This uncertainty is now taken advantage of by builders and others, who
sometimes find it irksome and inconvenient to be obliged to construct a
building in accordance with the byelaws of any town. Somewhat sharp
practices are consequently resorted to in order to evade the law, and
old buildings are converted into new ones without any powers of
interference by the urban authority or their surveyor. This is greatly
to be regretted, as unless the building comes within the operation of
the byelaws, it is frequently erected without any sanitary precautions
or even stability.

Sometimes a so-called repair of a building is commenced by adding a new
roof perhaps, at a higher level than the old one; when sufficient time
has elapsed to allay suspicion, a new front is erected, and then new
back and side walls in due course, the alteration of the interior floors
not attracting much attention.

Cases of this description are very troublesome to the town surveyor, as
if legal proceedings are to be taken against the offender, it is
necessary for the surveyor to make surveys and drawings of the works as
they are in progress in order to prove his case, and these might extend
over a considerable period of time.[154] In order to make these surveys
it would be necessary for him to enter the premises whilst the works
were in progress, but there does not seem to be any powers conferred on
him by any Act of Parliament for such a purpose, so that really he has
no power to prevent the occurrences I have mentioned.

It must also not be forgotten that what may sometimes appear to be an
entirely new building, may only be an addition to one that existed
before the passing of the Act, and although the new work may be ten
times as large as the old, still much conflicting evidence may be
brought to bear before it can be proved to be a “new building” within
the meaning of the Act.

Turning again to section 159 of the Public Health Act 1875, these words
will be found as defining also what is a new building: “or the
conversion into a dwelling house of any building not originally
constructed for human habitation.”

It would have been better in the interests of sanitation if the Act had
prohibited the conversion of any building at all into a dwelling house
without the approval of the urban authority, for as the law stands at
present, it is open for an owner of property to convert stables or
warehouses, &c., into dwelling houses, by simply asserting and bringing
witnesses or other evidence to prove that they were “originally
constructed for human habitation” irrespective of whether they are
adapted for the purpose or not, thus defeating the intention of the
Public Health Act to secure a better description of dwellings than those
that were erected before the passing of the Act.

When a dispute does arise with anyone as to whether a building comes
within the definition of “new” or not, it is well if possible to agree
upon certain points of fact and upon plans, &c., before the case comes
into court, and then to endeavour to get the magistrates to “view.” This
course if pursued often saves lengthy litigation, and a great waste of
time and money.

With reference to the deposit of plans of new streets or buildings, the
following clause of the Public Health Act 1875 provides that this shall
be done:

“Where a notice, plan or description of any work is required by any
byelaw made by an urban authority to be laid before that authority, the
urban authority shall, within one month after the same has been
delivered or sent to their surveyor or clerk,[155] signify in writing
their approval or disapproval of the intended work to the person
proposing to execute the same; and if the work is commenced after such
notice of disapproval, or before the expiration of such month without
such approval, and is in any respect not in conformity with any byelaw
of the urban authority, the urban authority may cause so much of the
work as has been executed to be pulled down or removed” . . . (38 & 39
Vic. c. 55, s. 158.).

The result of these clauses of the Act with reference to new streets and
buildings is, that some of the most arduous and irksome duties of the
town surveyor are embodied in the few words they contain. These duties
consist of, first, the careful examination of, and report upon all plans
of new streets and buildings; secondly, the constant supervision of
these streets and buildings whilst the works are in progress; and each
of these duties will be considered in the course of this chapter.

First then, as to the deposit and examination of the plans of new
streets or buildings.

The byelaws of which I have already made mention should contain some
such clause as the following:

“Every person who shall intend to make or lay out any new street,
whether the same shall be intended to be used as a public way or not,
shall give notice to the urban authority of such intention, by writing
delivered to them at their office, or at the office of their surveyor,
and shall at the same time leave or cause to be left at the office of
the urban authority, or of their surveyor, a plan and section of such
intended new street, drawn to a scale of not less than 1 inch to every
44 feet, and shall show on every such plan the names of the owners of
the land through or over which such street shall be intended to pass,
the level, width, direction, the proposed mode of construction, the
proposed name of such intended new street, and its position relatively
to the streets nearest thereto; the size and number of the intended
building lots, and the proposed sites, height, class, and nature of the
buildings to be erected therein, and the proposed height of the division
and fence walls thereon; and the name and address of the person
intending to lay out such new street, and he shall himself sign such
plan, or cause the same to be signed by his duly authorised agent.

“Such person shall show on every such section the level of the present
surface of the ground above some known fixed datum, the level and rate
or rates of inclination of the intended new street, the level and
inclination of the streets with which it will be connected, and the
level of the lowest floors of the intended new buildings.

“Every person who shall intend to erect any new building shall give
notice to the urban authority of such intention by writing delivered to
them at their office or at the office of their surveyor, and shall at
the same time leave or cause to be left at the said office detail plans
and sections of every floor of such intended new building, drawn to a
scale of not less than 1 inch to every 8 feet, showing the position,
form and dimensions of the several parts of such building, and of the
watercloset, earth closet, privy, cesspool, ashpit, well, and all other
appurtenances; and together with such plans and sections he shall leave
or cause to be left at the office of the urban authority, or of their
surveyor, a description of the materials of which the building is
proposed to be constructed, of the intended mode of drainage, and means
of water supply.

“Such person shall at the same time leave or cause to be left at the
office of the urban authority, or of their surveyor, a block plan drawn
to a scale of not less than 1 inch to every 44 feet, and shall show the
position of the buildings and appurtenances of the properties
immediately adjoining, the width and level of the street in front, and
of the street, if any, at the rear of such building, the level of the
lowest floor of such building, and of any yard or ground belonging
thereto.

“Such person shall likewise show on such plan the intended lines of
drainage of such building, and the intended size, depth and inclination
of each drain; and the details of the arrangement proposed to be adopted
for the ventilation of the drains.”

With reference to the deposit of plans as required by the above byelaw,
the following suggestions as to the best manner of effecting this may be
of some use:

(1.) The town surveyor should see that the person, or his agent,
intending to carry out the work, deposits tracings of the proposed
street or building signed by himself, so that there should be no after
dispute as to what really has been deposited; these tracings should be
on good paper properly inked in and coloured so as to be indelible. In
some towns it is the practice for original plans to be deposited
temporarily with the surveyor, who is expected to have them traced and
then returned to the owner, but this not only tends to the possibility
of dispute as to the correctness of the tracings, but it also takes up a
large amount of the surveyor’s time, or of such other officer as may
have charge of this branch of the duties.

In order to insure that the plans deposited shall not be afterwards
claimed by the person making the deposit, it might be well to add these
words to the clause of the byelaws which I have quoted:

“All such plans and sections so left at the office of the urban
authority or of their surveyor, shall remain the property of the urban
authority.”

(2.) It is advisable for the town surveyor to have in his possession a
number of printed forms on which application should be made by the
person intending to erect a new building and filled in and signed by him
or his duly authorised agent. The following is given as a specimen form
for this purpose:

  _To the Surveyor of the Urban Authority of       _

  I hereby give you notice that it is my intention to erect certain
  buildings in        street, and that the following particulars relate
  thereto:

  ---+-----------------------------------++---+-------------------------
  No.|            Questions.             ||No.|         Answers.
  ---+-----------------------------------++---+-------------------------
   1 |Christian and Surname _in full_,   || 1 |
     |Address and Occupation of          ||   |
     |persons for whom buildings to      ||   |
     |be erected.                        ||   |
     |                                   ||   |
   2 |Number of drawings deposited.      || 2 |
     |                                   ||   |
   3 |Name of architect, if any.         || 3 |
     |                                   ||   |
   4 |Description of buildings and of    || 4 |
     |the materials to be used in        ||   |
     |construction of same.              ||   |
     |                                   ||   |
   5 |Situation of buildings.            || 5 |
     |                                   ||   |
   6 |Level, or intended level of cellar,|| 6 |
     |or ground floor, with reference    ||   |
     |to surface of street.              ||   |
     |                                   ||   |
   7 |Thickness of walls.                || 7 |
     |                                   ||   |
   8 |Height of building in stories.     || 8 |
     |                                   ||   |
   9 |Area of clear open space at rear   || 9 |
     |or side of buildings exclusively   ||   |
     |belonging thereto.                 ||   |
     |                                   ||   |
  10 |Distance across such open space.   ||10 |
     |                                   ||   |
  11 |Description of ventilation.        ||11 |
     |                                   ||   |
  12 |Width of street or open space      ||12 |
     |opposite buildings.                ||   |
     |                                   ||   |
  13 |Size and description of drains,    ||13 |
     |and traps, and if ventilated.      ||   |
     |                                   ||   |
  14 |Inclination of drains.             ||14 |
     |                                   ||   |
  15 |Description of outlet to drains.   ||15 |
     |                                   ||   |
  16 |How supplied with water.           ||16 |
     |                                   ||   |
  17 |Situation, dimensions, and         ||17 |
     |particulars of apparatus of w.c.’s.||   |
  ---+-----------------------------------++---+-------------------------

  And I herewith leave detail plans and sections of every floor of such
  intended new buildings, drawn to a scale of not less than 1 inch to
  every 8 feet, showing the position, form, and dimensions of the
  several parts of such buildings, and of the watercloset, privy,
  cesspool, earthcloset, ashpit, well, and all other appurtenances; and
  also, a block plan drawn to a scale of not less than 1 inch to every
  44 feet, showing the position of the buildings and appurtenances of
  the properties immediately adjoining, the width and level of the
  street, the level of the lowest floor of the intended building, and of
  the yard or ground belonging thereto.

  Dated this        day of        18

  Signature in full,
  Address,
  Occupation,

A similar form may be prepared relating to plans of proposed new
streets, but of course the number of the questions contained in it will
be less.

(3.) When the necessary notices have been given and the tracings
properly deposited with the surveyor, he should carefully examine them
to see if they are in accordance with the byelaws which are in force in
his district. They should then be folded and placed in a large envelope,
which should be endorsed with the name of the person proposing to carry
out the work, the description of the work proposed, the name of the
architect, if any, the name of the builder, if any, the date of the
deposit, and a blank left for the date of approval. Each envelope should
also have a large number stamped upon it.

(4.) These particulars should be entered in a book of reference against
a corresponding number, so that at any future date it may be easy to
find and refer to any plans that have been deposited by means of an
index and the number on the envelope.

(5.) If on examining the plans the surveyor finds anything in them
which does not conform to the byelaws, he should be empowered by the
urban authority to return them at once to the person depositing them,
without having to wait to lay them before a committee, as this is a
great saving of time. In returning the plans the surveyor should write a
letter setting forth a schedule of his objections and the particulars of
the manner in which the plans and sections fail to comply with the
requirements of the byelaws.

(6.) If the plans are redeposited unaltered or showing still some
non-compliance with the byelaws, the surveyor must lay them before his
committee and explain in what respects they are defective, leaving it to
the committee to decide whether they shall be approved or not.

(7.) If the plans are in accordance with the byelaws, the surveyor
reports the fact to the committee, whereupon the plans should be at once
signed by the chairman of the committee.

(8.) All plans which the committee decline to approve of should be at
once returned to the person who deposited them with a written
notification of the reasons.

(9.) Plans which are approved of by the committee and afterwards
ratified by the general meeting of the urban authority, should be
carefully put away in pigeon-holes, so that by means of the reference
book previously described they can be easily found at any future time.
This is very important, as no extension of a building the plans of which
have been thus approved by the urban authority can ever afterwards be
carried out without their consent; and the plans of any alteration which
would not involve building upon an increased area must be deposited as
in the case of a new building.

(10.) A notification in writing should be sent to the person who has
deposited the plans when they have been approved by the urban authority;
and in sending this notification it is well to draw his attention to the
fact that notice must be given to the surveyor of the commencement of
the work, in order that the foundations, drains, &c., may be examined
by him before the ground is filled in.

The importance and necessity for the deposit of plans with a sanitary
authority cannot be over-estimated, but this deposit is of but little
practical good unless it can be insured that all the buildings are
erected strictly in conformity with these plans, and this, according to
the Act, is the duty also of the town surveyor. As a matter of fact, it
is quite impossible for any single person in any large town to perform
this duty, and a staff of assistants is consequently necessary if the
sanitary authority really wish their byelaws to be enforced.

Anyone who is practically acquainted with the difficulties that even
architects experience in superintending buildings they have _themselves_
designed, and how much they have to trust to the clerk of works (of
which there is generally one to every building), will readily see what
an absurdity it is to suppose that a town surveyor, with his multitude
of other duties and attendances at committees and meetings, can even
pretend to see that the 99 detail clauses of such byelaws as those
emanating from the Local Government Board Office, or even those of a
less stringent character, can possibly be enforced, especially when it
is remembered that many of the buildings he has to inspect have no
superintending architect, but are being erected for purposes of
speculation by what are commonly known as jerry builders.

Laws may be passed, books on sanitary questions may be written, but
until a change is made in the machinery and manner of the inspection of
buildings in the course of erection, and a large staff of inspectors or
sanitary police or some such officials are kept by a sanitary authority,
very little real advancement will be made with the poorer classes of
buildings.

It must in fairness to the builder be stated that to erect houses in
strict accordance with the model byelaws would probably mean loss of
money to him, as they could not possibly be built with any prospect of
a reasonable return upon the outlay. This partly arises from the
stringent clauses inserted with respect to the structure of walls and
other precautions for the prevention of fires. I cannot help thinking
that too much interference is now made by sanitary authorities for the
protection of property from fire.[156] It is not a sanitary question,
and is certainly one which chiefly affects insurance companies. Every
one should be able to pay his small insurance premium and the companies
should look after their own interests, and not expect it to be done by
others. If the sanitary authority wish to interfere in the question of
fire, why should not the protection of _life_ be considered as much as
property? Yet no clause can be discovered in the model byelaws rendering
it compulsory to make some provision in dwelling-houses or factories for
the easy escape of the inmates in case of fire. Indeed, as the Public
Health Act does not authorise the enactment of a byelaw for such a
purpose, such a clause would most probably be held to be _ultra vires_.

Another cause of expense to builders is the necessity imposed on them to
provide a comparatively large open space at the back or sides of new
dwelling-houses, thus sacrificing land, and sometimes making it almost
impossible to build at all. This necessity for open gardens or yards at
the back of even small labourers’ dwellings is in some towns pushed to
an extreme. If such houses are erected in a thoroughly sanitary manner
in all points of detail, it is questionable if this open space is really
beneficial. My experience has shown me that the space is often misused,
animals, such as rabbits, chickens, pigeons, &c., being kept there, or
it is made into a so-called garden, really a refuse heap which is a
receptacle for all the garbage and filth of the house, soon becoming a
fruitful source of disease to the occupants of the house itself and the
neighbours. It is also difficult to ensure that the space thus provided
and approved of in the deposited plans shall not be built upon at some
future period. It would be better if the streets in front of such
dwellings were wide, and a narrow street or “drangway” constructed at
the back for the dust-cart service, supply of coals, &c. The houses
themselves should have their rooms properly and thoroughly ventilated;
underground kitchens or living rooms should be prohibited. The drainage,
water-supply, and all the apparatus in connection with them, should be
perfect but simple. At the back of the house should be a small yard or
court well paved with asphalte or other impervious material, in which
should be placed the wash-house, w.c., &c. These and public parks and
plenty of fresh air in the streets and in the dwelling-houses themselves
should take the place of the large open spaces at the back of small
dwelling-houses, which, as I have already stated, are generally so much
misused.

The model byelaws with regard to new streets and buildings issued by the
Local Government Board contain most admirable clauses--valuable
suggestions which should receive attention from any town surveyor who
has to advise his corporation upon the subject of framing a set of
byelaws for his district--but they necessarily contain many clauses
which are not suitable equally well for towns in the north, south, east,
and west of England.

Many of the clauses are too stringent to be enforced, but this arises
not from any fault in the byelaws themselves, but rather from the
machinery employed in carrying them into effect. To secure all that they
require adequate inspection is needed, and this might be effected if
there was a fee charged by the urban authority of any town for the
purposes of proper inspection of buildings in course of construction;
and although it must be admitted that any provision which increases the
cost of construction of small dwelling-houses which shall be complete
in all sanitary requisites is undesirable, the extra cost of such
inspection would be too small to be appreciable, while the advantages
arising from such improved supervision would, even from a pecuniary
point of view, be of immense advantage not only to the community as
tending to improve the public health, but also to the owner as ensuring
good honest work in return for his money. In larger and more expensive
buildings this supervision is exercised by the architect, but as a rule
there is no architect employed in the case of small houses, and the
builder is accordingly left to his own devices, with frequently
unfortunate results.

  [153] ‘Model Bye-laws issued by the Local Government Board for the use
  of sanitary authorities. New Streets and Buildings, IV.’ Printed by
  George E. Eyre and William Spottiswoode, 1877.

  [154] It is open also to question whether in the case of an old
  building being gradually altered into a new one, it would be possible
  to prosecute, as there is the following limitation as to proceedings
  in the Public Health Act 1875: “Any complaint or information made or
  laid in pursuance of this Act shall be made or laid within six months
  from the time when the matter of such complaint or information
  respectively arose” . . . (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 252). The complaint
  could not be made when the work was first commenced, as no offence
  would have been committed, and if made after the work was finished, it
  might be urged that the offence was commenced more than six months
  prior, and that the complaint should have been made “when the matter
  of such complaint or information respectively arose.”

  [155] Plans are usually deposited with the surveyor as being the
  officer who would be most likely to understand them.

  [156] Nothing can be more vexatious than the bye-law compelling the
  party walls of new buildings to be carried up above the roof to at
  least 12 inches; not only does this frequently spoil the architectural
  appearance of a building, but it causes great expense in order to keep
  the wet out: a very difficult thing with a wall treated in this
  manner.




CHAPTER XIX.

SCAVENGING.


In a great number of towns in this country the town surveyor has charge
of the unostentatious, though very necessary sanitary work of the
scavenging of the district over which he has charge, and the following
are the clauses of the Public Health Act 1875, under which he carries
out his duties:

“Every local authority may, and when required by order of the Local
Government Board shall, themselves undertake or contract for--

“The removal of house refuse from premises;

“The cleansing of earthclosets, privies, ashpits, and cesspools;

either for the whole or any part of their district: Moreover every urban
authority and any rural authority invested by the Local Government Board
with the requisite powers may, and when required by the said board
shall, themselves undertake or contract for the proper cleansing of
streets, and may also themselves undertake or contract for the proper
watering of streets for the whole or any part of their district.

“All matters collected by the local authority or contractor in pursuance
of this section may be sold or otherwise disposed of, and any profits
thus made by an urban authority shall be carried to the account of the
fund or rate applicable by them for the general purposes of this Act;
and any profits thus made by a rural authority in respect of any
contributory place shall be carried to the account of the fund or rate
out of which expenses incurred under this section by that authority in
such contributory place are defrayed.

“If any person removes or obstructs the local authority or contractor in
removing any matters by this section authorised to be removed by the
local authority, he shall for each offence be liable to a penalty not
exceeding five pounds: Provided that the occupier of the house within
the district shall not be liable to such penalty in respect of any such
matters which are produced on his own premises and are intended to be
removed for sale or for his own use, and are in the meantime kept so as
not to be a nuisance” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 42).

The next clause imposes a penalty on the local authority if they fail
“without reasonable excuse after notice in writing from the occupier of
any house” to cleanse the ashpit, &c., within seven days if they have
“themselves undertaken or contracted for the removal of house refuse”
&c., and the next clause is as follows:

“Where the local authority do not themselves undertake or contract for,

“The cleansing of footways and pavements adjoining any premises;

“The removal of house refuse from any premises;

“The cleansing of earthclosets, privies, ashpits, and cesspools
belonging to any premises;

“They may make byelaws imposing the duty of such cleansing or removal,
at such intervals as they think fit, on the occupier of any such
premises.

“An urban authority[157] may also make byelaws for the prevention of
nuisances arising from snow, filth, dust, ashes, and rubbish, and for
the prevention of the keeping of animals on any premises so as to be
injurious to health”[158] (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 44).

There is also another clause in the Public Health Act 1875, which is as
follows:

“Any urban authority may, if they see fit, provide in proper and
convenient situations receptacles for the temporary deposit and
collection of dust, ashes, and rubbish; they may also provide fit
buildings and places for the deposit of any matters collected by them in
pursuance of this part of this Act” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 45).

The result of the above comprehensive clauses upon the subject of
scavenging is that the following duties fall upon the town surveyor
where that officer is responsible for such work:

(1.) “The removal of house refuse from premises.”

This work, like all the rest which follows, can be done either by the
local authority themselves or by contract, the former method, as I hope
presently to show, being much the best system.

In connection with this first duty of the removal of house refuse, the
following points will have to be considered:

(_a._) What is house refuse?

(_b._) What is the best manner of storing it on the premises pending the
visit of the scavenger?

(_c._) Which are the best methods for its collection?

(_d._) Which are the best methods for its disposal?

(2.) “The cleansing of earthclosets, privies, ashpits, and cesspools.”

This work where necessary (owing to the want of a system of sewerage)
can be carried out simultaneously with the collection of house refuse
and in almost the same manner.

(3.) “The proper cleansing of streets.”

In connection with this duty the following points must be considered:

(_a._) The best methods for sweeping and cleansing streets.

(_b._) If machinery effects such work better and more economically than
hand labour.

(_c._) The extra work involved by the bad construction of streets, or
the ill chosen materials of which they are formed.

(_d._) Whether private streets, courts and alleys, “not repairable by
the inhabitants at large,” should be swept and cleansed by the local
authority?

(_e._) The ultimate disposal of excessive accumulations of mud.

(_f._) The removal and disposal of snow.

(4.) “The proper watering of streets for the whole or any part of their
district.”

In considering this question it is necessary to note:

(_a._) The best form of vehicle for carrying and spreading the water.

(_b._) The number, position, and description of standpipes.

(_c._) Whether vehicles, or fixed standpipes and hose are best.

(5.) If the local authority do not impose a byelaw they must themselves
cleanse the “footways and pavements adjoining any premises;” and this in
excessively muddy weather, or after a heavy fall of snow, is no
inconsiderable work.

(6.) An _urban authority_ may make provision for the “temporary deposit
and collection of dust, ashes and rubbish.”

This involves public dust-bins being placed in suitable positions in the
town, the points in connection with this work being,

(a.) The most suitable sites for such accommodation.

(b.) The materials and form of which they shall be constructed.

Having thus stated all the heads under which the work of scavenging may
be grouped, it is necessary to decide what is “house refuse;” for unless
this is satisfactorily settled, considerable onus and expense will be
put upon the local authority if they are to include in the removal
trade, garden, and other similar refuse.[159]

It may be assumed that all house refuse which it is the duty of the
scavenger to remove, is really so removed by the direction of the local
authority without dispute, but that the following articles, which
frequently find their way into a domestic dust-bin, are not in the
strict terms of the Act expected to be removed by him. (1) Plaster from
walls and brick bats, (2) Large quantities of broken bottles and flower
pots, (3) Clinkers and ashes from foundries and green-houses, (4) Wall
paper torn from the rooms of a house, (5) Scrap tin (but not old tins
which have contained meats, &c., and which, although very useless and
bulky, may be fairly assumed to be house refuse), (6) All garden refuse
such as grass cuttings, dead leaves, and the loppings from trees and
shrubs.[160]

As a matter of fact, out of ninety towns with which I communicated on
this subject only thirteen of them directed the removal of both trade
and garden refuse without any special extra payment being made by the
householder, and this is only done when these materials are placed in
the ordinary dustbin or ashpit attached to a house. Several towns,
however, it appears remove such materials on special payments being made
of sums varying from 1_s._ 6_d._ to 3_s._ per load.

Disputes frequently arise between the men employed in scavenging and the
householder on these vexed questions as to the difference between house,
trade or garden refuse: a dispute often raised by the scavengers
themselves, in the hope of obtaining a gratuity or reward for the
clearance of a dustbin, which no doubt, legally, they are perfectly
justified in refusing to empty; and in order to lessen the chance of
such disputes and to attempt to settle this question, the following
suggestions may be of value.

It would no doubt be vexatious if any sanitary authority were to
absolutely refuse to remove the “garden” refuse from those houses to
which a small flower garden was attached, whilst it would on the
contrary be an unfair tax upon the general community if the refuse of
large gardens was removed without payment. A good rule would therefore
be to remove only such _garden_ refuse as was contained in the ordinary
dustbin or ashpit attached to a house, and that as the removal of any
kind of _trade_ refuse would no doubt lead to abuses if done
gratuitously by the sanitary authority, that this material should only
be removed on payment of some sum, which should be previously fixed by
the local authority, and each case should be reported to the officer
superintending the work before it was removed.

The next question is the important one of the manner and place in which
house refuse shall be temporarily stored pending the visit of the
scavenger.

The Public Health Act of 1875 enacts that: “Every local authority shall
provide that all drains, waterclosets, earthclosets, privies, _ashpits_,
and cesspools within their district be constructed and kept so as not to
be a nuisance or injurious to health” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 40).

And section 35 of the above Act states, “It shall not be lawful newly to
erect any house or to rebuild any house pulled down to or below the
ground floor without a sufficient watercloset, earth closet, privy, and
an _ashpit_ furnished with proper doors and coverings. Any person who
causes any house to be erected or rebuilt in contravention of this
enactment shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty pounds” (38
& 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 35).

The same Act also gives power to local authorities to enforce provision
of ashpit accommodation for houses where such accommodation does not
already exist, and to frame byelaws with respect to ashpits.

There can be no doubt that the position of the dustbin or ashpit, as
regards its site with reference to the main dwelling-house, is of
primary sanitary importance, for if the garbage and domestic
accumulations therein are allowed to remain for a few days, especially
when the weather is close, damp, and warm, they become very offensive,
and the emanations therefrom may even be highly deleterious and
dangerous to health; this effect is aggravated by persons emptying
vegetable refuse and other matters which are _wet_ into the dustbin, as
decomposition of these matters is greatly assisted by this addition, and
it would be well that all such matters should be burnt on the kitchen or
scullery fire along with a large percentage of the ashes which could be
sifted and saved from those which too readily find their way into the
dustbin, and are thus wasted. Care would of course have to be taken in
this process that no smell or nuisance was caused by the process of
burning.

It is open to considerable doubt if the fixed dustbin or ashpit is the
best or most sanitary receptacle for the house refuse; they may be
necessary and suitable for Public Institutions, or for large isolated
private dwellings, or for schools or any places where excessive
quantities of refuse may accumulate, but where this refuse is
systematically and properly removed by the order of the local authority,
at such times and in such manner as will be hereafter pointed out,
moveable or portable dustbins, boxes or baskets are far preferable to
the large immoveable, inconvenient fixed ashpit, recommended and
enforced under the Act.

The next point to consider is that of the collection of the house
refuse, which should be effected satisfactorily, economically and
expeditiously.

The following are the three methods by which this is attempted:

(1.) By a house to house call at intermittent periods.

(2.) By the scavengers giving notice of their approach by ringing a bell
or by other signal, and requiring the householder to bring out the
refuse to the cart.

(3.) By placing public dustbins in different localities, and expecting
householders in their vicinity to place the house refuse in these
dustbins, which are then cleared from time to time by the local
authority.

Experience alone can teach which of these is the best method to adopt in
any district, and it is usually found that some modification of all
three is necessary.

It is, however, difficult sometimes to adopt public dustbins not only on
account of their first cost, but from the objections raised by the
occupiers of adjacent houses to their being fixed in their
neighbourhood.

If these dustbins were constructed with properly balanced self-closing
lids, these objections might be overcome, and their first cost would be
but trifling when compared with the benefit to be derived by placing
them in some of the thickly populated courts and alleys which are
unfortunately to be found in nearly every town. Where there are no
public dustbins the inhabitants of these courts throw their waste
products upon the surface of the streets or courts, from time to time
throughout the day, as it cannot be expected nor desired that such
materials should remain, even for twenty-four hours, in their one living
room, which is frequently over crowded, and has but little spare space
even for the common necessities of life; but that these waste products
should be thus strewn over the surface of the street or court is almost
equally objectionable, and points to the advantage to be gained by
placing in convenient situations covered dustbins which could be easily
emptied once a day.

Undoubtedly the best method for the removal of refuse is the house to
house call, but except in suburban districts and for the collection of
refuse from the better class of dwelling-houses and public institutions,
the expense, delay and difficulty which would be incurred in calling at
every house throughout a town, would make it almost impracticable, and
consequently this system is universally combined with that which is
known as the bell or signal system, which simply means that the
scavenging cart in going its rounds has a bell attached to it, or the
horse, which bell rings automatically as the cart proceeds on its way;
or the man in charge blows a trumpet, or calls in stentorian tones,
“Dust oh!” On hearing this signal, _but not before_, the householder is
expected to bring out the refuse in some convenient receptacle, which is
then emptied into the cart by the scavenger.

As a matter of fact, the receptacles containing all the waste products
of these householders are brought out and are placed in the gutter of
the street close to the kerb, long before the cart makes its appearance
or can be reasonably expected to do so.

The result of these (generally inappropriate) receptacles filled with
heterogenous collections of house refuse being left unprotected in the
public streets, is that their contents are quickly strewn about the
surface of the street, by their being upset accidentally, or purposely,
and the appearance of the street, which has probably been carefully
swept and garnished during the night or early in the morning, quickly
assumes, especially in a high wind, a very offensive character, and
probably has to be entirely re-swept and cleansed before the ordinary
traffic of the day commences.

To obviate this evil I must refer my readers to a small book on the
subject of scavenging, entitled ‘Dirty Dustbins and Sloppy Streets,’
published by Messrs. Spon & Co., written by myself, in which I have
suggested moveable iron cylinders being placed in the streets for the
reception of the house refuse.

The “house to house” call system in the suburbs of a town may be greatly
assisted by a very simple remedy, which has already been tried in some
towns with considerable success. It consists in the householder placing
a card bearing the letter D, or some other distinguishing mark, in a
conspicuous place in a window, when the services of the scavengers are
required; these cards should be printed and circulated by the Sanitary
Authority of the district, who should state on the back of the card the
days on which the scavengers would visit each neighbourhood, with the
approximate hour of the day in which they would appear, in order that
the householder may not be unnecessarily inconvenienced by being obliged
to keep the card for any length of time in his window.

The scavengers in passing observe the signal, and call at the house;
otherwise they pass on, unless specially called in by the occupants,
thus avoiding any unnecessary delay in their rounds.

A visit from the scavengers either before seven or after ten in the
morning is generally very inconvenient for households of a superior
class, and should be, if possible, carefully avoided by the sanitary
authority.

The cart usually employed for scavenging is that known as the ordinary
“tip cart,” strongly, if not clumsily, constructed of an oak frame, with
elm or deal sides of considerable height; it holds about a couple of
cubic yards of material, and costs from sixteen to twenty pounds.

These carts are not only clumsy and heavy, but they give an overweighted
diminutive appearance to the horse between the shafts, especially as the
quality of horses employed for work of this character is frequently none
of the best. The height, too, of the cart is often so great as to
necessitate the use of a short ladder, up which the scavenger has to
climb, the result being a shower of dust when it is being loaded with
house refuse, and spatterings of mud, when it is being used as a slop
cart.

It is difficult also to effectually cover a cart of this description.
The imperfect mode at present adopted is to cover it with a tarpaulin,
which is tied down as tightly as the circumstances of the case will
admit, but which as a rule does not effectually answer the purpose for
which it is intended. In towns where the house refuse is not collected
separately from the road scrapings, a judicious mixture of the two in
the cart considerably assists in preventing any mud from splashing over
or the dust from blowing about.

The employment of wooden carts for this work is bad economy, their rough
usage, and the mode adopted for emptying them by “tipping,” renders
their life a short one; a cart in constant work frequently costs from
4_l._ to 5_l._ per annum in repairs, and having but little of the
original material of which it was constructed left in it at the end of
six years. They are also difficult to cleanse or disinfect.

With a view to obviate these and other objections, several improved
carts and waggons have been introduced by different makers, who have
styled them by a variety of names. Amongst others they are called dust
carts, general purpose carts, sanitary carts, slush carts, tumbler
carts, mud waggons, tip waggons, slop waggons, &c. These are constructed
with iron bodies fixed upon wooden frames and wheels; they are of
various forms and designs, the principal objects aimed at being
lightness of construction combined with strength, so balanced as to bear
with a minimum of weight upon the horse; economy in their cost has not
been lost sight of, and they are usually provided with some special
means for emptying, either by being tipped by a chain and windlass, or
by some mechanical arrangement of the tailboard; they are built very low
upon their axles, so as to be easily filled, are either completely
covered over with a moveable lid, or are fitted with hinged side boards,
so as to prevent any splashing over of their contents, and as they are
nearly all constructed with iron; they are easily cleansed and
disinfected whenever it is thought necessary to do so.

With reference to the important question of the ultimate disposal of
house refuse, street sweepings &c., no rules can be laid down, as so
much depends upon the position of every town and the character of the
district in which it is situated, as the following replies to some
questions which I addressed to several English towns will show.

In many towns it is stated that the whole of the refuse is used by brick
makers, in others it is simply “tipped to waste.” In one case the answer
is, “Sold by auction twice a year,” but to whom it is sold, and for what
purpose, does not transpire. In some towns it appears to be mixed with
lime and used as manure upon the fields, and in others it is mixed with
the sludge of the sewage farms, and is then ploughed or dug into the
soil of the farm. This seems a better plan than that of another town,
where it is “given or thrown away,” although the difficulty of disposing
of the old iron, tins, &c., is not touched upon in any of the foregoing
answers. The next reply states that “it is riddled, and the cinders and
vegetable refuse are burnt to generate steam, the fine dust is used with
the manure manufactory (tub system), the old iron is sold, and the pots,
&c., used for the foundations of roads.” In one case the whole of the
refuse is taken out to sea in hopper barges, and sunk in deep
water.[161] In a great number of towns it is sold by tender for the
year, but what eventually becomes of it does not transpire. But the most
favoured methods, where it cannot be sold as manure to farmers, seem to
be either that of carting it away to some spot outside the town, and
there using it for the purpose of filling up hollows and depressions, or
that of giving or selling it to brick-makers.

The practice of filling up hollow places with such materials cannot be
too strongly deprecated if there is any chance of dwelling houses being
erected on them, as the unsanitary condition of sites thus formed has
been frequently demonstrated.

Where towns are unable to dispose of their refuse by sale to farmers or
market gardeners, the best method, and one which is gaining in
popularity every day, is that of its destruction by fire.

With this object in view a Mr Fryer has invented an apparatus which he
styles a “Patent Carboniser, for the conversion of garbage, street, and
market sweepings, also other vegetable refuse, into charcoal.” This
apparatus consists of a structure somewhat resembling, externally, a
brick kiln. It is divided into hopper-shaped compartments, which at the
bottom are furnished with a furnace, fitted with a reverberatory arch. A
fire is lighted in this furnace, the necessary combustion being
obtained, and the heat maintained, by burning the cinders, which are
sifted out of the house refuse for this purpose. All the street
sweepings, refuse, garbage, &c., is then thrown in at the top of the
kiln, and it is there and then completely destroyed by the action of the
fire, and converted into charcoal, which is withdrawn through a sliding
door fixed at the bottom of the kiln.[162]

The next point which has to be considered, and which is the second in
order of the list of duties I have given at the commencement of this
chapter, is “the cleansing of earth closets, privies, ash-pits, and
cesspools.”

This is generally effected in conjunction with the collection of the
house refuse and the work is carried out at night. Under the Goux-tub
system the ashes of the house refuse are largely used as a deodorant or
absorbent as a lining for the tub,[163] but in the pail systems this
mixture is not effected until the tubs and refuse arrive together at the
depôt.

For descriptions of the manner in which the pail system for the
collection of excreta is carried out in Birmingham, I must refer my
readers to an article written by myself in a number of _The Sanitary
Engineer_ of New York published on the 1st Sept. 1881, in which I have
entered fully into the method there adopted and its advantages and
disadvantages, but which are too long to recapitulate in this chapter.

The next duty which has to be considered is that of “the proper
cleansing of streets.”

There is no doubt that for the sake of the appearance as well as the
health of any town its streets cannot be too well cleansed. Muddy and
wet streets cause dampness in the subsoil of neighbouring dwellings, and
dust is not only injurious to tradesmen’s goods but also to the lungs of
those who have to breathe an atmosphere loaded with silicate and organic
impurities.[164]

Street cleansing is effected either by hand-sweeping and hand-scraping,
or by machinery. As to which is the most economical much depends upon
the value of labour, and also upon the condition of the roads to be
dealt with, but in point of time and as a general rule the value of a
horse rotary brush-sweeping machine is undoubted, the only time at which
such a machine fails to do effective work is on the occasions when the
mud to be removed (owing to a peculiar condition of the atmosphere), has
attained a semisolidity, and is of a stiff and sticky consistency, when
it either adheres to and clogs the brushes of the machine, or is
flattened by them on to the road instead of being removed.[165]

The brushes of a machine last about 180 hours constant work, and then
the old stocks can be easily refilled with bass at no great cost. The
comparative work which can be done by a sweeping machine is about 11 to
1 of that effected by manual labour, so that the economy involved by the
former method is evident.

The strength and durability of the brooms used for the work of sweeping
the streets is of some importance, as affecting the ultimate cost of the
work, and some care and skill is required in their selection. Bass
brooms are better than birch brooms for this purpose, and the bass of
which the brooms are made should be sufficiently stout and of regular
thickness; it should be tough and elastic, not old, dry, and brittle,
each knot should be of uniform size and be firmly set, and the number of
knots in each broom head is also a matter of choice. A convenient and
fair test of the soundness of a broom is to soak it for a few days in
water before issuing it to the sweeper, and then note the time it will
last. The handles of the brooms should be made of alder wood.

On the question of the extra work involved in street cleansing by its
bad construction or by the materials of which it is constructed, climate
must be considered, as well as the amount of traffic it has to bear, and
also its gradient and the habits of the people residing in it.[166]

The Superintendent of the Scavenging Department at Liverpool has made
some observations and obtained some valuable information on these
points, which he has detailed in a report he presented to the Health
Committee of that borough in the year 1877, an abstract of which is as
follows:

GROSS COST FOR EACH TIME OF CLEANSING 10,000 YARDS SUPERFICIAL OF
DIFFERENT DESCRIPTIONS OF ROADWAY IN THE BOROUGH OF LIVERPOOL.

  --------+---------+--------+-------+------+------+------+------------
          |         |        |  Con- |      |      |      |   Gross
          |         |        | dition| Area | Loads| Times|  Cost per
          |Descrip- |        | of re-|  of  |  re- | swept|10,000 Yards
          |tion     |        |pair of| Car- | moved|  in  | Superficial
          | of      |  When  | Road- |riage-|in one|  one |  for each
   Street.|Pavement.| paved. |  way. | way. |Month.|month.| cleansing.
  --------+---------+--------+-------+------+------+------+------------
          |         |        |       | Yds. |      |      |
          |         |        |       | supr.|      |      |£ _s._ _d._
  Lord    |Granite  |  1877  |  Very | 4,503| 15   |  26  |0  6   5¹⁄₂
  Street  |setts,   |        |  good |      |      |      |
          |asphalte |        |       |      |      |      |
          |joints   |        |       |      |      |      |
          |         |        |       |      |      |      |
  North   |  Ditto  |  1872  |  Good | 3,287| 17¹⁄₂|  26  |0  8  10¹⁄₂
  John    |         |        |       |      |      |      |
  Street  |         |        |       |      |      |      |
          |         |        |       |      |      |      |
  Tithe-  |Granite  |  1872  |  Bad  | 5,150| 38   |  26  |0 11   2
  barn    |setts,   |   and  |       |      |      |      |
  Street  |ordinary |  1874  |       |      |      |      |
          |joints   |        |       |      |      |      |
          |         |        |       |      |      |      |
  West    |Ditto,   |  1876  |  Very |11,980| 35   |  13  |0  9   4³⁄₄
  Derby   |asphalte |        |  good |      |      |      |
  Road    |joints   |        |       |      |      |      |
          |         |        |       |      |      |      |
  Great   |  Ditto  |  1877  |  Good |16,860| 85   |  13  |0 14   4¹⁄₂
  Howard  |         |        |       |      |      |      |
  Street  |         |        |       |      |      |      |
          |         |        |       |      |      |      |
  Great   |Ditto,   | Not as-|  Mod- |15,900| 85   |  13  |0 14   1
  Homer   |ordinary |certain-| erate |      |      |      |
  Street  |joints   |  able  |       |      |      |      |
          |         |        |       |      |      |      |
  Kensing-|Macadam  |  Ditto |  Good |14,540| 76   |  13  |0 14  3³⁄₄
  ton     |breasted |        |       |      |      |      |
  Street  |with sett|        |       |      |      |      |
          |         |        |       |      |      |      |
  Stanley |  Ditto  |  Ditto |  Bad  |16,534|186   |  13  |1  8  9¹⁄₄
  Road    |         |        |       |      |      |      |
  --------+---------+--------+-------+------+------+------+------------

He adds that the full benefit of the impervious pavements as regards the
cost of scavenging has not yet been felt, for almost all the lines of
streets so paved are intersected at short distances by streets of
ordinary jointed granite setts or macadam, whence a quantity of mud and
refuse is dragged by the traffic on to the asphalted jointed roadways,
which are consequently debited with the cost of removal of some effete
material not intrinsically belonging to them.

Mr. Till, the Borough Surveyor of Birmingham, from investigations he has
made on this subject, says that for granite pavement 2 cart loads of mud
have to be removed from every 1000 square yards of surface, one third of
a load for wood pavement[167] and 4 loads three times a day (a total of
12 loads) for macadamised roadways.

The ultimate disposal of the material removed from the surfaces of
roadways especially when they are macadamised is a difficult matter, as,
being chiefly composed of silicate, it is valueless as a manure.

In small towns, except during abnormally muddy weather, it may be mixed
with the house refuse and sold to farmers, or the road scrapings
themselves may be used as an excellent sand, if thoroughly washed, to
mix with lime or cement to form mortar for public works; excessive
accumulations of mud, however, must be got rid of in the most economical
and speedy manner possible, and this is effected either by filling up
old disused quarries with it, or depositing it upon waste lands, or
forming embankments for new roads, but in no case should it be used, as
I have before stated, upon building sites; it is difficult and expensive
to destroy it or partially convert it into other matters by fire, so
that if these methods which I have enumerated are impracticable, the
only other method left for the disposal of the sweepings or scrapings
from the streets is to take them out to sea in hopper barges and sink
them in deep water.

The last question that arises on the subject of scavenging before we
consider the disposal of snow, is whether the onus of cleansing private
courts and alleys which are not repairable by the urban authority should
be borne by them or not.

The great difficulty attached to this duty arises from the fact that
these private courts and alleys are generally very badly paved, if paved
at all, full of pits, where pools of stagnant mud and water collect, and
even in the best cases, the interstices between the pebbles, or other
paving, are filled with filth arising in great measure from the dirty
habits of the people, and this filth it is found exceedingly difficult
to dislodge. The remedy for this is to compel the owners of the abutting
properties to have the courts and alleys properly paved with asphalte,
or other equally impervious material, after which it would be easy for
the urban authority to cause them to be swept at least once a day, and
flushed with water in the hot weather once a week, but in order to
compel the owners to execute this very desirable work it would be
necessary to put the complicated machinery of section 150 of the Public
Health Act 1875 in force, and the expense to the landlords would be in
many cases very disproportionate to the value of their property.

Out of the ninety towns to which reference has before been made, the
authorities of only nineteen of them cleanse the private courts and
alleys in their jurisdiction, although for the sake of sanitation it is
very desirable that such work should be so undertaken by them.

In most towns it is necessary to cleanse its principal streets at least
once a day, and this appears to be the practice of nearly all the ninety
towns I have referred to; only seven of them, however, appear to have
this operation repeated more frequently; in several towns, the horse
droppings, &c., are removed at once, under what is called the “orderly”
system, and this is especially necessary in streets that are paved with
such materials as wood paving, asphalte, or granite setts. The suburban
streets of a town need only be cleansed once or twice a week, except in
special cases of extremes of mud or snow, and I will now proceed to
discuss the questions involved by a heavy fall of the latter.

Experiments have shown that a cubic yard of fresh fallen snow may weigh
as much as 814 pounds or as little as 71 pounds. Assuming that a cubic
foot will weigh 16·38 pounds, I estimate that for a fall of 3 inches of
snow upon a street 36 feet in width, 20 tons, representing a bulk of
about 100 cubic yards, would have to be removed for every 100 yards of
length of street if it was thought necessary to clear it away.

Assuming that there are 30 miles of street in a town from which the snow
must be removed; 21,144 loads must be carted somewhere, at a cost of at
least 1,500_l._, assuming that each cart could make ten trips a day, and
even then it would take 352 carts a whole week to effect it.

It may be contended that I have taken an extreme case, and that, of
course, the snow does not lie for very long upon the ground in the
condition in which it fell, and that hourly it is reducing in bulk and
weight by being ground up by the traffic, and finding its way in the
form of water into the sewers. This may be so, but at the same time it
must not be forgotten that the bulk is also being constantly increased
by that which is shovelled off the house tops[168] and brought out from
private premises adjoining the streets.

Upon this point Mr. Hayward, the Engineer to the Commissioners of Sewers
of the City of London, says[169]:--

“Snow readily compresses under the traffic, and when removed in carts
and shot down elsewhere it may be assumed that on an average four cubic
yards of snow measured as it has fallen is equal to one cubic yard when
placed on the apparatus.” This computation, however, does not make any
allowance for the snow thrown from off the roofs, &c., and it of course
greatly consolidates whilst travelling in the cart.

Fortunately for a town surveyor in this country, exceptionally heavy
falls of snow are not very frequent, but when they do happen great
pressure is put upon his department to cope with it, and one of the
greatest difficulties he has to contend against is the disposal of the
snow after it has been placed in the cart.

If there is a river close by, it can be taken there and tipped, but this
is objectionable if it is a navigable river where dredging has to be
done, as it is surprising what a quantity of road scrapings and other
matters are always removed with the snow, and these materials naturally
sink to the bottom, and add considerably to the cost of dredging.

If there are public parks the snow may be heaped in them, provided no
damage is done to the grass or paths, but the snow thus heaped takes a
considerable time to melt, the first effect of a thaw being to
consolidate it: a better plan is to deposit it upon waste spots, if
these are not too far from the streets which have to be cleared.

Tipping the snow down the manholes into the sewers has been tried in
London and other cities, but has failed through the snow consolidating,
and although lighted gas jets have been turned on to the snow, it has
still melted too slowly to be of any practical utility.

Speaking of Clarke’s apparatus for melting snow, Mr. Haywood, in the
same report from which I have already quoted, says:

“It is seldom that a fall of snow occurs sufficiently large to cause
serious interruption to the traffic; heavy snowstorms in fact occur only
once in six or seven years; for some years therefore these apparatuses
if fixed might not be required. They would either have to be taken out,
stored and refixed yearly or maintained in their places and kept in
order there, in either case at an annual expense.”

In perusing Mr. Hayward’s report it also appears that the cost of this
apparatus fixed is about 120_l._, and the cost of melting the snow 9_d._
per cubic yard.

In order to grapple with this question of the removal of snow, I am of
opinion that it is useless to attempt to cart it away while falling, but
try to make clear crossings for the foot passengers and to keep the
traffic open. If there should be a high wind at the time, and the snow
drifts in consequence, cut through the drifts so as to allow the
vehicular traffic to continue. Directly the snow ceases to fall put on
all available hands to clear the channel gutters and street gratings, in
preparation for a sudden thaw, when, if these precautions were not
taken, serious flooding and great damage to property might ensue; for
the same reason cart away all the snow you can at the bottom of
gradients and in the valleys, and also from very narrow streets and
passages, &c. In the wider streets use the snow plough, or with gangs of
men (in the snow season there is generally plenty of labour obtainable),
shovel the snow into a long narrow heap on each side of the street,
taking care to leave the channel gutters and gratings quite clear, and a
sufficient space between the heaps for at least two lines of traffic.
Passages must also be cut at frequent intervals through the heaps, in
order to allow foot passengers to cross the street, and also to let the
water reach the channel gutters as soon as the snow begins to melt.[170]

The next point to be considered in this chapter is that of “The proper
watering of streets for the whole or any part of their district.”

One of the earliest methods for watering streets, but one which has, I
think, almost entirely died out, on account principally of the large
quantity of water used in the process, was that of allowing the water to
run down the channel gutters, ponding it back by means of canvas or
leather aprons placed across the gutter, and then spreading the water on
to the surface of the street by throwing it with wooden shovels. This
method, which at first sight may appear clumsy, is an exceedingly good
one upon sanitary grounds. It not only lays the dust, but it washes the
surface of the street, and it most effectually scours out the gutters
and at the same time flushes the sewers, which at the season that
watering is necessary is also of great importance to any town. By this
process a delightful freshness is given to the air, and the appearance
of the cool and limpid water rushing along on each side of the street
acts favourably upon the inhabitants. The great objections to this
system are (1) the enormous quantity of water that is used in the
process, and (2) the difficulty of doing the work after the traffic of
the day has commenced.

Somewhat of a modification of this process is what is known as “Brown’s
System of Street Watering,” which may be described as follows:--A lead
pipe is laid in the footpath at the back of the kerb on each side of the
street to be watered, small gratings or shields being fixed in the pipe
at intervals of twelve inches, and the remaining space filled with
asphalte; small holes are then bored in the pipe through the openings in
the shields. The pipe is connected with the water main in the street,
and is provided with the necessary stopcocks, &c. On the water being
turned on, fine jets are thrown in different directions upon the surface
of the street. The width of roadway that can be watered by this process
depends upon the pressure of the water, but it may be fairly assumed
that in most towns streets of fifty feet width could be effectually
watered in a few minutes by a pipe on each side of the street.

This process has not gained much favour hitherto, principally on account
of the large first cost involved, which would amount to upwards of
800_l._ per mile of street, but the expense afterwards should not much
exceed the wages of one man at about 3_s._ 6_d._ per day to manipulate
the necessary work, and the interest on the outlay and depreciation of
the pipes, &c.

The other objections to this system are:--

(1.) The liability of the pipes and perforations to get out of order,
especially when allowed to lie idle for so many months in each year.

(2.) The unpleasantness to pedestrians which must be caused whilst the
watering is proceeding.

(3.) The inconvenience to the traffic during the process.

(4.) The effect upon the water by high winds, when in all probability it
would be blown back across the foot pavement.

(5.) In very broad streets it would be inoperative.

In Paris and other continental cities, and also in several towns in this
country, the watering is effected by hose and reels, or by portable iron
tubes.

Mr. Parry, C.E., the Borough Surveyor of Reading, has given the
following particulars of the system of hand watering adopted in that
borough, in which he gives the cost, and describes the utility of that
method as compared with the use of water carts:

A water cart (he states) will water twice a day a superficial area of
23,849 yards, and for a length watered one width that means 5,962 lineal
yards, or for a double width 2,981 yards, the cost per day of laying on
being as follows:--Horse, cart, and man, 8_s._ cost of maintenance of
cart, harness, shoeing, &c., 1_s._ 5_d._, making 9_s._ 5_d._ per day.

With respect to the hand machines he states that he has one of Headley’s
drum machines, and three of special make, somewhat similar to those used
in Paris. They are equal in point of work; and one machine will water
23,740 square yards twice a day, which, it will be observed, is very
close to the amount of work performed by a cart.

“Headley’s machine cost us (he continues), five years ago when new,
31_l._ 7_s._ 3_d._, and the repairs and maintenance since that date have
been 22_l._, or an average of 4_l._ 8_s._ per annum, and is just now
almost past repair. The other description of hand machine cost each when
new 20_l._, and the repairs and maintenance have amounted to an average
of 3_l._ 18_s._ each year. They were in use some time before Headley’s
was obtained, and they will be of use for a long time yet. The cost of
labour per day by the hand machines is for two men at 2_s._ 10_d._
each--5_s._ 8_d._--as it requires two men to work the machine properly,
one to distribute the water, and the other to move the machine and to
attach and detach the apparatus to and from the hydrants; add to this
7_d._ per day for maintenance and repairs, will make 6_s._ 3_d._ per
day. The quantity of water delivered by the water carts is 0·51 gallons
per square yard, and by the hand machine 1·30 gallons.”

It will thus be seen that in the case of the cart 24,324 gallons of
water are used per diem, and 61,724 gallons by the hand machines, the
surface watered being very nearly the same in both cases. Assuming that
the water has a commercial value of 6_d._ per 1000 gallons, and adding
this to the cost per diem in each case, the total cost stands thus:

  Hand machines   £1 10_s._ 10_d._
  Carts           £1  1_s._  7_d._

the advantage in point of cost being in favour of the carts; but the
hand machine may water better, especially in broad streets, although in
narrow streets or where there is much traffic, this method would be
impracticable.

In Paris both hose and carts are used for watering the thoroughfares,
the former for the boulevards, the avenues, and a certain number of
first-class streets.

The most commonly known method in this country for watering the streets
and roads of our towns is that of carrying the water in wheeled barrels,
carts, or vans, and distributing it therefrom through a perforated pipe
upon the surface of the road as the vehicle is drawn along by a horse
attached to the shafts.[171]

The old barrel upon wheels gave place to a cart, and now we have
“Bayley’s Patent Hydrostatic Van,” which is too well known to almost all
town surveyors to need much description. It holds about 450 gallons of
water and takes about 9 minutes to fill (this time of course varying
with the size of main and pressure of water), and ten minutes to spread
the water upon the surface of the road.

With regard to the work that one of these vans will accomplish in
comparison to that effected by an ordinary cart, the following table,
compiled from experiments on the question, will be useful:

  -------------+--------+------+--------+----------+-----------+------
               |        |No. of|        |          |           |
               |        | Loads|  Total |          |           |
               |Contents|  to  |quantity|          |           | Gain
               |   in   | cover|   of   |          |           |  per
  Cart or Van. |Gallons.| beat.| Water. |   Time.  |Difference.| Cent.
  -------------+--------+------+--------+----------+-----------+------
               |        |      |        |Hrs. Mnts.| Hrs. Mnts.|
  Bayley’s van |   450  |  5¹⁄₂|  2475  | 1    23  |    ..     | ..
  Ordinary cart|   225  | 11   |  2475  | 1    50  |  0    27  |24¹⁄₂
  -------------+--------+------+--------+----------+-----------+------
  Bayley’s van |   450  |  5¹⁄₂|  2475  | 1    38  |    ..     | ..
  Ordinary cart|   237  | 11   |  2607  | 2    10  |  0    32  |25
  -------------+--------+------+--------+----------+-----------+------
  Bayley’s van |   450  |  6   |  2700  | 1    45  |    ..     | ..
  Ordinary cart|   290  | 11   |  3190  | 2    10  |  0    25  |19¹⁄₄
  -------------+--------+------+--------+----------+-----------+------
  Bayley’s van |   450  |  8   |  3600  | 2    15  |    ..     | ..
  Ordinary cart|   260  | 17   |  4420  | 3    30  |  1    15  |36
  -------------+--------+------+--------+----------+-----------+------

This shows a mean gain of 26 per cent. in favour of the van, and the
following tables, made by an inspector in 1873, showing the actual
occupation of the ordinary carts and Bayley’s vans during a day’s work,
are extremely interesting, as showing that while the van is engaged in
spreading the water the time of the cart is wasted in travelling to and
from the stand posts, and when it is borne in mind also that the van
spreads water more widely than the cart, there can be no doubt that a
saving of at least 30 per cent. can be effected by the substitution of
these vans for the old-fashioned cart.

                                 CARTS.
  -------------+--------+----------+----------+------------+----------
               |        |Travelling|Travelling|            |
               |Filling.|   Full.  |  Empty.  |Waiting, &c.|Spreading.
  -------------+--------+----------+----------+------------+----------
               | H.  M. |  H.  M.  |  H.  M.  |   H.  M.   |  H.  M.
  Paddington   | 1   45 |  2    9  |  1   58  |   0   20   |  1   30
  St. Saviour’s| 1   29 |  2   16  |  2    4  |   0   26   |  1   29
  Strand       | 1   11 |  2   30  |  2   18  |   0   17   |  1    3
  Kensington   | 4   40 |  2    2  |  1   57  |   0    0   |  1   54
  Chelsea      | 2   44 |  1   15  |  2   14  |   0   35   |  1    6
  -------------+--------+----------+----------+------------+----------
                                 VANS.
  -------------+--------+----------+----------+------------+----------
  Paddington   | 3   33 |  1    9  |  1    3  |   0    0   |  3    0
  St. Saviour’s| 2   20 |  1    4  |  1   21  |   0   23   |  2   58
  Strand       | 2   30 |  1   25  |  1   14  |   0   20   |  2   23
  -------------+--------+----------+----------+------------+----------

In the year 1856, Mr. Scott, C.E., the Chief Surveyor of the parish of
St. Pancras, kept an account of the daily round of an ordinary water
cart, when he found that through an average working day of 10¹⁄₄ hours,
exclusive of the breakfast and dinner hours, the cart took one hour and
twenty minutes filling, fifty minutes only in distributing the water on
the roads, and eight hours and seven minutes in travelling to spread the
water and back to the stand posts. It was obvious that these were placed
too far apart, and by the subsequent introduction of additional
standposts Mr. Scott found, in the year 1867, that the filling occupied
two hours, the distribution one hour and thirty minutes, and the
travelling to and fro six hours and thirty minutes; so that it may be
assumed, with an ordinary two-wheeled water cart, that two-thirds of the
day is spent in travelling, one fifth in filling, and about one-seventh
in the actual spreading. But a watch should be kept upon the man who is
engaged in this work, otherwise he will idle away his time and the
streets remain unwatered. A good check upon this is Mr. Bayley’s
Tell-Tale, which registers automatically on a dial at the side of the
van the number of rounds a man goes each day.

Watering the streets with sea water should be adopted whenever it is
feasible, as it not only gives a delightful freshness to the air and
dispels iodine, but it also causes the surface of the street to maintain
its humidity for a longer period than when fresh water is used, as it
impregnates the soil with hygrometric matter. This has been often
attempted artificially, by adding common salt to the water used for
watering, but it is rather too expensive for the benefit derived.[172]

Watering the roads with a largely diluted disinfectant such as
“Sanitas” in the liquid form, is frequently of great benefit, and where
it can be afforded, it should be occasionally done, especially in the
narrower streets and more crowded districts of a city or town, or when
an epidemic has broken out.

With reference to the very important question as to the cost of
scavenging, street-cleansing and watering. It is, of course, not
possible to lay down any hard and fast lines, as it must necessarily
vary considerably according to circumstances; much depends upon whether
the district is an urban one, consisting of houses closely packed
together, or whether it is suburban, with scattered villas and mansions
standing in their own grounds; the question, also, of the distance of
the depôts to which the material has to be carted, considerably affects
the result of any estimate, as also does the cost of horse hire, the
rate of wages, and whether the district is of a hilly or flat nature,
and, as I have before shown, the manner in which the streets are formed
and paved, the habits of the people, the requirements as to cleansing
streets and watering, and last, but not least, the manner of the
eventual disposal of the rubbish after removal; all these points must
bear with great weight upon any question of cost, and make the results
widely different.

On referring to the returns to which I have more than once alluded, it
is found that the cost of removing the house refuse and cleansing and
sweeping the streets combined, varies considerably in different
localities. In one case the sum amounts only to the rate of one
half-penny per annum per head of the population of the town, whereas in
another case the amount is at the rate of three shillings and sixpence
per head. On calculating the average cost per head of population per
annum of the ninety towns from which I received replies on this point, I
find that it amounts to about tenpence half-penny, after giving credit
for any sum of money realised by the sale of the refuse to farmers and
others; so that if this work is costing the ratepayers of a town or
city anything under a shilling per head of the whole population every
year, they have no cause to grumble.

Before closing this chapter I will make a few observations upon the
subject of contracts for work of this description.

There is no doubt that the “dust and slopping” contractor is fast going
out of fashion,[173] as it has been found that the work is far more
carefully and systematically carried out without the intervention of a
contractor; for if we turn to the articles of agreement or contract
usually drawn up between a sanitary authority and a contractor for
scavenging, we find that they must be very binding in their phraseology,
and enter fully into the details of the work; they should state very
clearly the number of times in every week that the contractor shall
cause all the ashpits in the districts enumerated to be emptied and
cleansed, the manner in which this work shall be performed, and how the
materials thus removed shall be disposed of and the place of their
ultimate destination. The conditions should further specify what amount
of manual, team labour, and carts, are necessary for the work, and also
what plant the contractor must keep in the way of ladders, baskets,
shovels, and brooms, &c. The conditions should also contain a carefully
prepared list of the streets to be swept, and the manner and number of
times this work must be executed, and arrange for the disposal of the
materials thus removed.

In many such contracts it is found necessary to insert clauses binding
the contractor, under all sorts of penalties, to be always at the
disposal of and under the commands of the inspector of nuisances, or
such other officer or officers as the sanitary authority may appoint.
The contractor’s men also are forbidden to accept gratuities, and are
directed on no account to remove either trade or garden refuse, and they
are also enjoined to be “careful to consult the convenience of the
householders in their visits, and to thoroughly clean up all dirt and
litter that they may cause in the discharge of their duties. If they
fail in any or either of these injunctions and commands, or for any
other dereliction of duty, the inspector of nuisances, or such other
officer as the sanitary authority shall appoint, may summarily dismiss
them, without any reference being made on the subject to their employer
the contractor, and in fact the conditions have necessarily to be made
so stringent and binding as to be either totally inoperative or open to
grave abuses, or, on the other hand, the work can be carelessly and
improperly executed by the contractor.

The consequence of such binding clauses is that the officers, if they do
their strict duty, will probably be engaged in constant disputes and
litigation with the contractor as to the due and proper observance of
the terms of his contract, and thus their time is much occupied instead
of in other more important matters, which is naturally detrimental to
the interests of the ratepayers.

I am strongly of opinion that the work of the collection of house refuse
and cleansing the streets should be carried out by the local authority
with their own officers and staff, and that executing this work by
contract is a mistake and a false economy. It is, perhaps, true that it
may be done in the latter manner at less actual cost to the ratepayers,
but all public work should be done in the best manner possible,
irrespective of cost, thoroughly, but without extravagance, and the
result of such work, especially where it affects the cleanliness and the
appearance of a town, soon fully repays any moderate extra cost that may
thus have been incurred, irrespective of the enormous benefit that is
conferred upon any community by the reduction of disease and the
death-rate by a proper attention to such necessary sanitary work.

  [157] A _rural authority_ cannot apparently make any byelaw with
  regard to the prevention of such nuisances.

  [158] A byelaw under this section “must be limited to imposing upon
  the occupier the duty of cleansing or removal at such intervals as the
  sanitary authority may think fit. The mode of cleansing or removal and
  the precautions to be observed in connection with the process are not
  matters within the range of such byelaws.” _Vide_ ‘Memorandum to the
  Model Byelaws issued by the Local Government Board for the use of
  Sanitary Authorities, No. 1, Cleansing of Footways and Pavements,
  &c.,’ 1877.

  [159] In Glenn’s ‘Law of Public Health and Local Government,’ 8th
  edition, in a footnote to section 44, p. 39, several instances are
  given of _what is not refuse_, such as ashes from furnaces, &c., and
  it is stated that “the intention of the Act was that only the rubbish
  arising from the domestic use of houses should be removed.”

  [160] The Bromley Local Board issue a card on which is printed,
  amongst other information with reference to the contract for the
  removal of house refuse, the following suggestions:--“It is hoped that
  householders will as far as possible facilitate the systematic removal
  of refuse by providing suitable dust-bins, and directing their
  servants that ordinary house refuse only shall be deposited in such
  receptacles. The following are some of the items of refuse which the
  contractors are bound to remove, viz.:--cinder ashes, potatoe
  peelings, cabbage leaves, and kitchen refuse generally. But the
  contractors are not required to remove the refuse of any trade,
  manufacture, or business, or of any building materials or any garden
  cuttings or sweepings.”

  [161] In New York about 800,000 tons of refuse are disposed of
  annually in this manner.

  [162] For a description of the manner in which this is effected at
  Manchester, see my book on scavenging, to which I have before
  referred.

  [163] The ashes are mixed with chaff, chopped straw, refuse hay, grass
  cuttings, dry street sweepings, wool and hair, shoddy, &c., and a
  small percentage of sulphate of iron or lime.

  [164] Professor Tyndall, in his beautiful experiments, has proved that
  dusty air is alive with the germs of the bacteria of putrefaction,
  whilst the pure fresh air which he gathered on a mountain peak in the
  Alps is innocent of such germs, and is absolutely powerless to produce
  any organisms.

  [165] Dry dust will absorb about ten times its bulk of water, thus
  swelling considerably and producing the greasy mud so often seen after
  rain.

  [166] In Boston, U.S.A., the macadamised roads are not swept at all,
  as it is considered that by sweeping off the sand and detritus their
  durability is much lessened, but their gutters are cleansed as
  required, and rubbish picked up. (_Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings
  Institution of Civil Engineers,’ vol. lxiii. p. 368.)

  [167] In Regent Street, London, in November 1881, I saw four loads of
  mud removed from about 1000 square yards of surface, it being then
  almost new wood pavement.

  [168] See note under “Other Obstructions and Nuisances,” p. 155, 8th
  edition, Glen’s ‘Law of Public Health and Local Government.’

  [169] _Vide_ ‘Report to the Streets Committee of the Honourable the
  Commissioners of Sewers of the City of London on Melting Snow by
  Clarke’s Apparatus,’ by William Haywood, Engineer and Surveyor to the
  Commission, 1881, p. 9.

  [170] With regard to the removal of snow from the footpaths, it is
  highly desirable that this should be effected by the occupiers of the
  premises adjacent to the street, as otherwise it adds immensely to the
  work of the local authority. The following interesting remarks by the
  superintendent of the scavenging department of Liverpool will be no
  doubt read with great interest:

  “The only way to compass the removal of snow from the footwalks of the
  principal thoroughfares within a comparatively short time, is by
  sprinkling them with salt, such as is commonly used for agricultural
  purposes. It is certain that, unaided by the salt, a sufficient number
  of men cannot be procured for the emergency of clearing snow from the
  footways of the most important thoroughfares. It has been stated by
  medical authorities that the application of salt to snow is
  detrimental to the health of people who have to walk through the
  ‘slush’ produced by the mixture, and that the excessive cooling of the
  air surrounding the places where the application has been made is
  injurious to delicate persons. It therefore seems that the application
  of salt to snow should not be undertaken during the day time, but
  should be commenced not before 11 p.m., nor continued after 6 a.m.,
  and that only such an area of footwalks should be so treated on any
  one night as the available staff of men can clear by an early hour the
  following morning.

  “To sweep snow from the footwalks whilst the fall of snow continues,
  and especially during business hours, appears to be wasteful and
  futile, and to apply salt during the same periods may be held to be
  injurious to health.

  “That the snow of an ordinary fall can be removed from the footwalks
  by an application of salt an hour or so before they are scraped is an
  ascertained fact, except at least when a moderately severe frost has
  preceded, accompanied, or followed the snow-fall, or when the snow has
  drifted into extensive accumulations. Were it not for the danger to
  health by excessive cooling of the air, and for the expense attending
  the operation, all the impervious pavements could be cleared of snow
  (unless the fall was a heavy one) in a comparatively short time by a
  liberal application of salt and the employment of the horse sweeping
  machines as soon as the snow had become sufficiently softened to admit
  of their use.”

  [171] In the metropolis of London alone, the watering of the streets
  and roads employs, in addition to a staff of inspectors and foremen,
  about 1500 men, and an equal number of horses and carts; and in order
  to lay the dust effectually, about 30,000 tons of water must be spread
  upon the streets every dry day, the cost of this gigantic work being
  nearly 200,000_l._ per annum upon an average of 120 days when watering
  becomes necessary.

  [172] In Rouen, where chloride of calcium is obtained from the
  manufactories of pyroligneous acid in the neighbourhood, it is mixed
  with the water for use on the roads, and it is stated that on a mile
  of road, 16 feet in width, 5630 gallons of water were necessary daily,
  but that the same result was attained with 1480 gallons of chloride
  solution, marking 30° Baumé, and costing about ¹⁄₂_d._ per gallon, the
  humectation remaining good for five or six days with the solution of
  chloride. With water only in 1093 yards, in four rounds daily, 3520
  gallons were used, the cost being 48_s._; with chloride of calcium the
  cost was 32_s._ per day.

  [173] Amongst the questions which I addressed to the surveyors of the
  principal towns of England in 1879 was the following:--“Is the house
  refuse collected by the sanitary authority or by a contractor?” and
  out of the ninety towns from which I received replies, only thirty
  were found to employ contractors for this purpose, and of these the
  authorities of two of them proposed to dispense with the services of
  the contractor, and to administrate the work with their own staff, as
  they found the existing state of things was thoroughly unsatisfactory.




CHAPTER XX.

SEWERAGE.


The Public Health Act 1875 contains a considerable number of clauses
dealing with the subject of the sewers of a town, but two of the
shortest sections in the whole Act, and yet those that involve a
considerable amount of work in the town surveyor’s department, are the
following:

“Every local authority shall keep in repair[174] all sewers belonging to
them, and shall cause to be made such sewers as may be necessary for
effectually draining their district for the purposes of this Act”[175]
(38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 15).

“Every local authority shall cause the sewers belonging to them to be
constructed, covered, ventilated,[176] and kept so as not to be a
nuisance or injurious to health, and to be properly cleansed and
emptied”[177] (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 19).

As to what sewers do “belong” to the local authority, the following
section of the Public Health Act 1875 states:

“All existing and future sewers within the district of a local
authority, together with all buildings, works, materials, and things
belonging thereto,

“Except

“(1.) Sewers made by any person for his own profit, or by any company
for the profit of the shareholders; and

“(2.) Sewers made and used for the purpose of draining, preserving, or
improving land under any local or private Act of Parliament, or for the
purpose of irrigating land; and

“(3.) Sewers under the authority of any commissioners of sewers
appointed by the Crown,

shall vest in and be under the control of such local authority.

“Provided that sewers within the district of a local authority which
have been, or which may hereafter be constructed by or transferred to
some other local authority, or by or to a sewage board or other
authority empowered under any Act of Parliament to construct sewers,
shall (subject to any agreement to the contrary) vest in and be under
the control of the authority who constructed the same, or to whom the
same have been transferred” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 13).

And as to the definition of the word “sewer,” the same Act states:

“‘Sewer’ includes sewers and drains of every description, except drains
to which the word ‘drain’[178] interpreted as aforesaid applies, and
except drains vested in or under the control of any authority having the
management of roads and not being a local authority under this Act.”

The result of this acquisition by the local authority of the sewers in
their district is, that in most of the old cities and towns a legacy of
very defective and imperfect sewers has been inherited, and considerable
expense in their repair and maintenance has thus been entailed.

A great number of books have been written on the subject of sewerage,
and much valuable information has been published from time to time, so
that it almost seems superfluous to say much upon the subject; however,
a few remarks which are particularly applicable to the work of a town
surveyor may be of some service.

The word _sewerage_ may be taken as meaning a system of sewers carrying
_sewage_ which is the fluid and feculent refuse from dwellings and their
yards, &c. Sewage is generally found mixed with rain water from the
surface of the streets and roofs of houses, together with the liquid
waste products from manufactories,[179] and sometimes, although very
improperly, with subsoil water.

A good system of sewerage should embrace the whole of the following
requirements:--

(1.) Each sewer should be laid at such a depth as will readily drain the
basements of the adjoining buildings.

(2.) Its area and gradient must be so regulated as to make it
self-cleansing, and at the same time carry off effectively the maximum
quantity of liquid for which it is intended.[180]

(3.) Each sewer should (unless quite impracticable) be laid in straight
lines and with even gradients between man- or lamp-holes, and these
gradients must not be excessive, or damage may be caused to the sewer.
A velocity of about 6 feet per second is sufficient.

(4.) Sewers must be laid at proper levels in respect of their
intersection with each other, bearing in mind that they are all
generally converging to one point.

(5.) Manholes should be of simple construction; circular brickwork upon
concrete is a convenient description. They may be made to serve the
additional purposes of ventilating shafts, flushing chambers, junction
shafts, storm overflows, and side entrances.

(6.) Tributary sewers or drains should not join the main sewers at right
angles unless the bottom of the manhole is so constructed as to give the
required curve in the direction of the flow of the sewage, and they
should join at a height (if of unequal section) equal to the difference
of their sectional diameters, the aim of all junctions being to cause as
little disturbance as possible in the proper flow of the liquids along
their respective channels.

(7.) Sewers should not be constructed of too large a sectional area, but
none should be less than 6 inches internal diameter, as house-drains in
this country are never less than 4 inches diameter, and the main sewer
should of course be larger than its tributaries. It is also rather
difficult to ventilate a smaller sewer than 6 inches, and very little is
saved by putting in a smaller sewer than that.

Stoneware pipes of greater diameter than 18 inches should never be used.
Where larger sewers are constructed they should be either concrete
pipes,[181] or brickwork or concrete should be employed.

The position of the sewer should, if possible, be behind the houses for
the following reasons:--

(1.) The waterclosets, sinks, &c., being nearly always at the back, a
drain under the house (which is always objectionable) is avoided.

(2.) Economy is secured to the owner of the property, as a shorter
length of drain is required than if the sewer was in the front.

(3.) A better fall is usually obtained.

(4.) Where there is a separate or partially separate system of sewerage,
a double sewer in the street is avoided.

The only objection to this method being that of the chance of the sewer
becoming choked or broken when entry has to be made into private
property to repair it, but this ought never to happen after once the
sewer has been properly constructed. Of course, where houses are closely
packed together it would not be possible to carry the sewer at the back,
but where it can be done I agree thoroughly with Mr. Rawlinson, C.B.,
C.E., &c., who, speaking of this method, says, “I know nothing but good
of it.”

Where the sewer is proposed to be taken through any private lands it is
necessary to act in accordance with the following clause of the Public
Health Act 1875, and serve the necessary notices, a specimen form of
which also follows:

“Any local authority may carry any sewer through, across, or under any
turnpike road, or any street or place laid out as or intended for a
street, or under any cellar or vault which may be under the pavement or
carriageway of any street, and, after giving reasonable notice in
writing to the owner or occupier (if on the report of the surveyor it
appears necessary), into, through, or under any lands[182] whatsoever
within their district. They may also (subject to the provisions of this
Act relating to sewage works without the district of the local
authority) exercise all or any of the powers given by this section
without their district for the purposes of outfall or distribution of
sewage” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 16).

The form of notice necessary to be served before entry upon any lands
for the purpose of carrying out any sewerage works may be on the
following pattern:--

  “NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN.

  “1. That the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses of the borough of       ,
  in execution of the powers and authorities given to and vested in them
  by virtue of the Public Health Act 1875, upon the report of their
  surveyor, whereby it appears to the said authority to be necessary to
  enter into, through, or under the lands and premises particularly
  described in the schedule hereunder written, for the several purposes
  hereinafter mentioned, the said mayor, aldermen, and burgesses will
  immediately after the        day of        enter into and upon the
  premises described in the said schedule hereto, and on the plan
  hereinafter mentioned numbered       , for the purpose of        in,
  through, or under the said lands and premises       , and to construct
  all other necessary works for all or any of the purposes aforesaid.

  “2. The course of the said sewer is indicated by a line drawn on the
  said plan from the point        to       .

  “And notice is hereby further given that a plan of the intended works,
  and of the lands and premises upon which it is intended to enter for
  the construction of the same, is now open for inspection, between the
  hours of 10 in the forenoon and 4 in the afternoon, and may then be
  seen at the offices of the borough surveyor,        Street,       ,
  and a tracing thereof is hereunto annexed.

  Dated this        day of        18  .

  _________________________
  _Town Clerk._”[183]

THE SCHEDULE REFERRED TO.

  ------------+------------------------+--------------+-------+---------
  No. on plan.|Description of premises.|Where situate.|Owner. |Occupier.
  ------------+------------------------+--------------+-------+---------
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
              |                        |              |       |
  ------------+------------------------+--------------+-------+---------

In carrying out works of sewerage the greatest care is necessary in the
materials selected and the manner in which the work is executed. Tunnels
and shafts must be most carefully timbered, levels very accurately given
and adhered to, and for this purpose sight rails and long boning rods
can be used with great advantage. In running sands, or where the line of
an old sewer is being followed, or in fact anywhere where a good and
quick joint is required, “Stanford’s” patent jointed pipes should be
used.

“This joint is made by casting, upon the spigot and in the socket of
each pipe, rings of durable material, which, when put together, fit
mechanically into each other, as in a bored and turned joint; it needs
no skilled labour in fixing, only a little grease, allows of slight
settlement of the pipes without injury, and requires neither cement,
clay, nor other extraneous material, the pipes containing a perfect
joint within themselves.”

Breakages sometimes occur in stoneware pipe sewers after they are laid,
which generally are found on examination to arise from one of the
following causes:

(1.) Laying the pipes on a rigid foundation without recessing the
sockets so as to give an even bearing.

(2.) Laying the pipes on foundations which afterwards yield or settle.

(3.) Laying the pipes at too great a depth without protection by
concrete or otherwise to resist the pressure of the superincumbent
earth, or by not sufficiently punning the filling-in, when a sudden
settlement will often crack or crush a pipe.

(4.) Accidental or wilful injuries to pipes which are not noticed before
the trench is filled in.

(5.) Laying the pipes at too shallow a depth without protection, when
heavy traffic or a falling weight upon the surface will crush or crack a
pipe.

(6.) Defective or weak pipes.[184]

The following plates give the different forms of sewerage pipes that are
now manufactured in this country, in addition to those of common
shapes:

[Illustration: BROOKE’S PATENT SUBSOIL DRAINS AND PIPE-RESTS.]

[Illustration: CREEKE’S PATENT CAPPED PIPES.]

[Illustration: MAWBEY’S PATENT GROOVED SOCKET-PIPES.]

[Illustration: HENRY SHARP, JONES, & CO.’S ROCK-CONCRETE PIPES.]

[Illustration: JENNING’S PATENT CHAIR AND SADDLE PIPES.]

The chokage in pipe sewers generally arises from one or more of the
following causes:--

(1.) Improper gradients.

(2.) Insufficient flush.[185]

(3.) Foreign articles finding their way into and choking the sewer.

(4.) Defective joints through which the liquid runs leaving solid
matters behind.

(5.) An excess of road detritus or of ashes, through the house closets
of the poor, finding their way into the sewer.

(6.) Improper bends in the line of sewer.

(7.) Right-angle or improper junctions being formed with the sewer.

(8.) A collapse of the sewer.

A temporary chokage in a small-sized sewer which does not arise from any
structural defect can be speedily and effectually remedied by the use of
Ben Reed’s patent drain-cleaning rods, which are probably too well known
to every town surveyor to need any description, but in conjuction with
man- or lamp-holes and straight lines of sewers they are very valuable.

Before closing this chapter, a few words upon what is called the
“separate system of sewerage” may be of use.

The mistake hitherto made has been to try to absolutely separate all
rainfall from the sewers, and there is no doubt that a partial
separation of the rain-water from the sewage proper has many advantages;
but it must be understood that a great deal of the rain-water that falls
upon roofs of buildings and in back yards and small back streets must of
necessity be carried into the sewers, as well as liquid refuse from
manufactories. A partial separation thus carried out has the following
advantages:

(1.) It is not necessary to have sewers of enormous diameter.

(2.) The depth of the surface water conduits need not be so great as
that which is necessary for sewers.

(3.) The avoidance of road detritus being washed into the sewers.

(4.) Where the sewage has to be pumped or treated chemically or put on
the land, the combined system causes an immense unwieldy bulk of liquid
to be at times dealt with.[186]

(5.) The sewers may be placed at the back of the houses, a great
advantage which cannot be carried out under the combined system.

(6.) The regularity in the amount of flow of sewage.

(7.) The accuracy with which the quantity of sewage may be calculated
and the sizes of sewers apportioned.

(8.) Economy both to the general rates and also to individuals in
carrying out their connections.

(9.) Where old and defective sewers exist they are often fitted to carry
surface water, but are quite inappropriate as sewers.

No rules, however, can be laid down with regard to this question, as
each town or district must be treated as the case requires.

In conclusion, I will mention the different methods at present in vogue
for the sewerage of towns.

(1.) The combined system, where all sewage, surface water,
manufacturers’ refuse, and subsoil waters are carried in the same sewer.

(2.) Similar to the above, the subsoil water, however, being carefully
excluded.

(3.) The partially separate system.

(4.) The absolutely separate system, where there are three sets of
sewers, one for sewage proper, one for surface water, and one for
subsoil water.

(5.) The “Lieurner” system, which professes to remove all sewage by
exhausting the air in the sewers and drains.

(6.) “Shone’s” pneumatic ejector system, which is described as
follows:--

“The ejectors are cast-iron receivers of a suitable form, placed
underground at depths to suit the locality, into which ejectors the
sewage flows through the ordinary pipe drains from the houses. As the
liquid rises in the interior of the ejector, and when full, it lifts a
valve and admits compressed air from an engine which supplies the entire
district. The ejectors are thus emptied of their contents, which are
blown out in about eighty seconds of time, and the sewage passes through
cast-iron main pipes of suitable diameters to the land, or other outlet
provided to receive it, or it may be distributed upon the waste land as
it passes through.”

(7.) The dry systems, which consist of--

(_a._) Earth closets;

(_b._) Tubs, as the Goux, &c.;

(_c._) Pails, as the Rochdale;

(_d._) Middens.

But all these dry systems require some system of sewers to carry off
rain-water, slop-water, &c., and in my opinion are not suitable for very
large communities.

  [174] If the sewers vested in and belonging to a local authority are
  allowed by their negligence to get out of repair, they are liable to
  an action for damages (_Vide_ ‘Fitzgerald’s Public Health Act,’ 3rd
  edition, p. 19). Keeping in repair does not, however, include
  construction of entirely new works. (_Ibid._)

  [175] The sewers provided by a local authority must be sufficient to
  carry off the ordinary sewage and rainfall of the district, but they
  need not be sufficient to carry off an extraordinary flow of water
  caused by a storm; damage caused by that comes under the definition of
  damage caused by the act of God, for which there is no individual
  responsibility (_Ibid._ p. 20). This clause seems to insist upon
  sewers carrying the rainfall.

  [176] See chapter on “Ventilation of Sewers.”

  [177] A local authority is not to be held liable for not keeping their
  sewers cleansed at all events and under all circumstances, but only
  where by the exercise of reasonable care and skill they can be kept
  cleansed. They are, however, liable, in case they make default in
  observing the requirements, to have an injunction filed against them
  and to be restrained by injunction from allowing the continuance of
  the nuisance. (_Ibid._ p. 23.)

  [178] For the legal definition of “drain,” see the chapter on “House
  Drainage.”

  [179] Facilities must be given to enable manufacturers to send the
  liquids proceeding from their works into the public sewers, provided
  the sewers are more than sufficient for the requirements of the
  district, or if the liquids would not prejudicially affect the sewers,
  or from their temperature or otherwise be injurious in a sanitary
  point of view. _Vide_ Rivers Pollution Act 1876 (39 & 40 Vic. c. 75,
  s. 7). But this question is often greatly disputed, and has led to
  much litigation.

  [180] If everything has to be carried in a sewer, the following
  provisions must be made:--

  (_a_) The house sewage which may be calculated from the water supply.

  (_b_) Manufacturers’ refuse.

  (_c_) Rainfall, which is a very uncertain quantity.

  (_d_) The subsoil water should certainly be dealt with, but it should
  on no account be permitted to enter the sewers themselves; separate
  provision under the main sewers should be provided for this purpose.

  [181] Messrs. Sharp, Jones and Co., of Bournemouth, make most
  excellent concrete pipes up to 36 inches in diameter, which can be
  economically and advantageously used in many instances, and are
  gaining every day in popularity with engineers.

  [182] The definition of “lands” as given in the Public Health Act
  1875, is as follows:--“‘lands’ and ‘premises’ include messuages,
  buildings, lands, easements, and hereditaments of any tenure” (38 & 39
  Vic. c. 55, s. 4).

  [183] Notices may be signed either by the clerk to the local authority
  or their surveyor (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 266).

  [184] The thickness of stoneware pipe sewers should be as follows:

  ----+--------------------------+----------------------+----
      |Internal diameter of pipe.|Thickness of material.|
      +--------------------------+----------------------+
      |         in.              |          in.         |
      |          3               |          ¹⁄₂         |
      |          4               |          ⁵⁄₈         |
      |          6               |          ³⁄₄         |
      |          9               |         1            |
      |         12               |         1¹⁄₈         |
      |         15               |         1¹⁄₄         |
      |         18               |         1³⁄₈         |
  ----+--------------------------+----------------------+----

  The thickness of fire clay or earthenware pipes should be slightly in
  excess of those given for stoneware.

  [185] The patent automatic flushing arrangement by Mr. Rogers Field,
  C.E., is an excellent apparatus for lessening the chances of a sewer
  becoming choked from this cause.

  [186] It is necessary in many towns where the combined system is in
  force, and the sewage has to be pumped when heavy rains commence, to
  put temporary clay dams round the street gratings to prevent the
  surface water from entering the sewers, thus at once showing the
  inability of the system to deal with flood waters.




CHAPTER XXI.

SEWAGE DISPOSAL.


The magnitude of the question of “sewage disposal” almost decided me to
refrain from making any remarks upon it, but on reconsideration I
thought a few might be serviceable.

Sewage disposal means the getting rid of the foul water contained in the
sewerage system of any community.

Where a dry method is in force for the collection of the excrementitious
matters it is called “interception”; the following are some of the
systems which effect it:--

Privies, ashpits, middens, cesspools, pails, troughs, the “Rochdale,”
the “Eureka,” the “Goux,” Fosses Permanentes, Fosses Mobiles, and
Moule’s, Taylor’s, and Phillip’s earth closets.

The collection and disposal of the mass of excrement under these dry
systems is found to be a very troublesome matter, and they are at their
best but inferior substitutes for water carriage, nor must it be
forgotten that sewers and drains are necessary even if a good
interception process is in force. I shall therefore confine my remarks
to the disposal of water-carried sewage.

Many books have been written, many valuable reports have been prepared
and issued, lengthy papers and discussions have been frequent at the
meetings of scientific societies, and almost innumerable pamphlets have
been published upon this important sanitary subject. Some millions of
money have also been spent in trying to deal satisfactorily with this
question, not only with a view to the purification of the effluent of
the sewage, but also to endeavour to make a profit out of the
residuals.[187] The result of this literature, discussion, and
experiment has led to the following conclusions:

No hard and fast lines can be laid down as to the best method to be
adopted for the disposal of the sewage of any town, but the peculiar
circumstances of each case must be considered before advice could be
given on the subject: geographical position, physical arrangement,
habits of the population, and the character and quantity of the sewage
of the town being some of the most important.

In any case it is necessary that the transmission of the sewage to the
outfall should be effected as speedily as possible, and that the
position of this outfall should be such as to cause no nuisance. The
contents of the sewers should, if possible, be emptied by gravitation,
as pumping is a constant expense, and economy with efficiency must of
course be studied.

Up to the present time the following are the methods adopted in this
country for the disposal of sewage:

(1.) Passing the sewage in its crude state into the sea or tidal river.

(2.) Passing the sewage in its crude state over large tracts of land;
this is called broad irrigation.

(3.) Passing the sewage in its crude state on to small tracts of land
previously prepared by deep drainage; this is called intermittent
downward filtration.

(4.) Mechanical subsidence of the sewage in large tanks, the effluent
passing on to land or into a river.

(5.) Mechanical filtration of the sewage, the effluent passing on to
land or into a river.

(6.) The introduction of lime or other precipitant into the sewage,
which is allowed to settle in tanks, the effluent passing on to land or
into a river.

Very little need be said upon the first of these methods. Many engineers
of high standing contend that, where practicable, the sea or the tidal
estuary of a river is the right place for the sewage, as no costly works
are necessary, and an abominable nuisance is thus got rid of at once and
for ever. To ensure this, however, great care must be exercised in the
selection of the site for the outfall. Float observations should be
made, not only of the surface tides and currents, but also of those at
different depths, and the effect upon the sewage by its different
specific gravity from that of the salt water must be allowed for, as
well as the difference of level of the tides and the configuration of
the adjoining coast line.

The second method, that of broad irrigation, is one that finds
considerable favour with a large number of engineers and agriculturists.
The great sewage-disposal cry has always been, “Put back on the land
what you have taken from it, or some day there will be no beef and no
bread.” The difficulty is to always find land in sufficient quantity and
so situated as to be available for this purpose. Almost any soil is,
however, suitable for irrigation, provided it is well and properly
drained. The quantity of sewage which should be used for this purpose
per acre of land varies considerably, as will be seen on reference to a
table prepared by Mr. Henry Robinson,[188] where the number of
inhabitants to each acre irrigated is in one case (Leamington) stated to
be 55, in another (Blackburn) 208,[189] the average being 137, the
number of gallons per head of population per diem being 38.

It may be useful to state here that a hundred tons of sewage will cover
an acre of land 1 inch in depth, and that the value of sewage as a
manure is said to vary from ¹⁄₂_d._ to 2_d._ per ton, or, calculated in
another manner, about 10_d._ per head of population per annum.

The best crops for a sewage farm (in addition to nearly all kinds of
market-garden produce) are rye-grass, mangolds, beetroot, cabbages,
carrots, potatoes, turnips, rabi, parsnips, lucerne, beans, wheat,
oats, and barley; the cereals, however, are apt to run rather to straw,
and some care is also necessary not to oversewage potatoes and some
other root crops. Grazing cattle or cows can also be carried on with
advantage, the presence of sewage having no effect either on the milk or
flesh of animals fed on sewage farms.

The third method, that of intermittent downward filtration, is really
irrigation of land to such an extent as the land will filter or purify
the sewage, the effluent passing off pure, irrespective of any effect
upon the crops which may be growing upon the land.

Great discussions have arisen (the principal battle-ground being Merthyr
Tydvil) as to the maximum quantity of sewage which an acre of properly
prepared land will treat, some of the champions of this system
contending that a good porous soil properly drained to a depth of six
feet will purify the sewage of 6000 persons per acre, others that only
the sewage of 250 persons can be so treated.[190]

There can be no doubt that earth has a most powerful deodorising power.
Laboratory experiments have shown that as much as eight gallons of
sewage can be filtered through a cubic yard of loamy soil in twenty-four
hours, the soil being drained at a depth of six feet, the effluent
therefrom having obtained a wonderful degree of purity. Much, however,
must depend upon the character of the soil of the filtering area and the
strength of the sewage which is being operated upon.

The following description of the manner in which the earth acts upon
sewage will be of interest:

“The fæcal matters and other impurities attached themselves to the
surfaces of the particles of earth by a kind of cohesive attraction, and
in this state were readily attacked by the oxygen of the air. Their
organic carbon became carbonic acid, their nitrogen was converted into
nitrous or nitric acid, which united with the lime, magnesia, and other
basic matters present. Mechanically suspended impurities were arrested
as by a sieve, and the water issued from beneath--not indeed fit for
dietetic or domestic purposes, but at any rate in a fair state of purity
and quite inoffensive to the senses.” (_Vide_ W. Crookes in the
discussion on the Sewage Question by Norman Bazalgette, ‘Min. of
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,’ vol. xlviii. p.
164.)

The land thus used as a sewage filter requires constant aëration by
being dug over or ploughed, and if this precaution is taken, it is
surprising to what a wonderful extent the land will take sewage without
becoming what is called “sewage sick.” Clay soils are, however, stated
to be ill-adapted for this purpose.

The next method, that of mechanical subsidence of the sewage in large
tanks, has been attempted in conjunction with irrigation and filtration
without much benefit, nor has the fifth method I have mentioned, viz.,
that of mechanical filtration of the sewage, met with any better result.
Artificial filters have been constructed of burnt clay, cinders, coke,
charcoal, peat, chalk, gravel, broken stone, sand, spongy iron (this is
now being applied very successfully for the purification of water),
straw, cocoa-nut matting, wicker-work, and wire gauze of different
degrees of fineness of mesh.

The late Mr. Odams spent a considerable sum in endeavouring to strain
sewage through revolving screens of wire gauze with but little success,
and Mr. Bannehr has striven to achieve the same object by passing sewage
over oscillating screens of the like material.

In all these cases of mechanical filtration, however, the effluent has
either not been sufficiently pure or the screens and filters have become
clogged and refused to act.[191]

The last method that I have mentioned for the disposal of sewage is
that of precipitation, or what may be more properly called the chemical
treatment of sewage.

Precipitation means the production, by the introduction of chemical
substances within the body of the sewage, of certain solid compounds,
which, in settling, drag down with them the suspended matters in the
sewage, together with a small proportion of the polluting matters which
are in solution in the sewage, this proportion varying with the quantity
of solid matters deposited. The effluent from the tanks in which this
precipitation takes place is then allowed to flow direct into a river or
stream, or is still further purified by being passed over land or
filtered through deep-drained soils.

Chemical treatment of sewage was first tried in Paris in the year 1740,
and since then every effort has been made to extract a valuable and
commercial manure from sewage and purify the effluent. Between the years
1865 and 1875 more than 400 patents were taken out in respect of these
and other matters in connection with the sewage question.

It is almost needless to say that but few of these patents were of any
practical value. Those processes which have some merit and are now best
known are, I believe, included in the following list:--

LIST OF CHEMICAL PROCESSES FOR THE TREATMENT OF TOWN SEWAGE.

  The A. B. C. (or Sillar’s) process
  Anderson’s process
  Bird’s        „
  Blyth’s       „
  Campbell’s    „
  Collin’s      „
  Forbes and Price’s process
  Fulda’s process
  Goodall’s  „
  Hanson’s   „
  Higg’s     „
  Hille’s    „
  Holden’s process
  Lenk’s      „
  Lundy’s     „
  Manning’s   „
  Scott’s     „
  Smith’s     „
  Spence’s    „
  Stothert’s  „
  Suvern’s    „
  Whitthread’s process
  Wickstead’s     „

Space will not permit me to describe these processes, and probably most
of them, if not all, are familiar to my readers. Suffice it to say that
in nearly all cases the _modus operandi_ is that of mixing certain
chemicals with the sewage by mechanical agitation, or by passing the
sewage over “salmon ladders,” &c., then allowing the sewage to remain
perfectly still whilst the solids are gravitating, and then dealing with
the effluent in different manners.

Amongst the numerous chemical ingredients which are used for this
purpose may be mentioned the following:--

Alum, animal charcoal, ashes, blood, bone ash, carbolic acid, chalk,
chloride of lime, chloride of zinc, chloride of iron, clay, creosote,
hæmatite, hydrate of lime, lead nitrate, magnesian salts, oxide of
manganese, perchloride of iron, salt, soda, sulphate of zinc, sulphate
of iron, sulphuric acid, and tar.

One of the great difficulties in connection with the precipitation of
sewage is the disposal of the sludge which is left behind in the tanks.

This sludge contains about 90 per cent. of moisture, and if left to dry
atmospherically, a thin crust forms over it, thus protecting that which
is underneath, and it will not dry for many months. In some cases it is
sought to dispose of the accumulations of sludge by digging it into the
land; in others it is mixed with house ashes, &c., and sold as manure.
Its bulk, however, in proportion to its manurial value is so excessive
as to render it almost valueless, and it is difficult to get rid of it
for this purpose even when fortified with ammonia or other chemical. A
frequent practice now adopted is to reduce its bulk by exposure or by
presses to a semi-dried condition; in other cases it is dried to a
powder by heat, and General Scott has patented a method where, in
connection with the lime process, it is burned and manufactured into
cement. Sometimes it is squeezed in presses, such as Needham and Kite’s
or Johnson’s, or it is filtered by Milburn’s or Weare’s apparatus. For
drying the sludge by heat, Borwick’s or Forrest’s machines have been
used with some success, but there is no doubt that the slimy,
glutinous, albuminous, offensive mixture technically known as sludge is
a difficult matter to dispose of in all sewage works.

In connection with the chemical treatment of sewage, it is of advantage
to pass the effluent over land filters on the intermittent downward
filtration principle. Another very effective plan is to pass the
effluent (or even crude sewage) through land which is thickly planted
with the Anacharis or American weed, duckweed, sedges, rushes, reeds,
&c., or through beds of osiers or alder trees. An acre of land thus
planted is said to purify more than three million gallons of sewage per
diem.[192]

There is no doubt that plants of this description have a powerful action
in purifying sewage or foul water of any kind, and where land is scarce
this method has many advantages.

It is almost unnecessary to add that where sewage is treated in any
other manner than that of throwing it into the sea or river, bulk is a
great objection, especially if it has to be pumped.

To obviate this bulk the separate system is of great advantage, and
Isaac Shone’s new method for ejecting sewage along pipes seems also to
be a most desirable invention in connection with this subject.

  [187] It is computed that every ton of liquid sewage which is treated
  chemically costs about three-quarters of a farthing.

  [188] _Vide_ ‘Sewage Disposal,’ by Henry Robinson, C.E., &c., 2nd
  edition, p. 79.

  [189] I purposely omit (Kendal) 856, as this is, properly speaking,
  “filtration.”

  [190] For much interesting information upon this and other subjects in
  connection with sewage disposal, see ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the
  Institution of Civil Engineers,’ vol. xlviii. p. 105 et seq. Also the
  report of a committee of the Local Government Board on Modes of
  Treating Town Sewage, 1876. ‘Sewage Disposal,’ by Henry Robinson,
  C.E., and other works on the subject.

  [191] Under the Rivers Pollution Act, no effluent is allowed to enter
  a stream &c., if it contains more than three parts of suspended
  inorganic matter, and one part organic matter for every 100,000 parts
  of liquid.

  [192] _Vide_ ‘Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
  Engineers,’ vol. xlviii. p. 179.




CHAPTER XXII.

VENTILATION OF SEWERS.


The necessity for some manner of dealing with the noxious vapours
emanating from sewage other than that of letting it find its way from
the sewers into the house drains and thence into dwelling houses, has
induced the legislature of this country to introduce the following
clause in the Public Health Act 1875, which imposes on every local
authority the duty of causing their sewers to be ventilated so as not to
be a nuisance or injurious to health.

“Every local authority shall cause the sewers belonging to them to be
constructed, covered, ventilated and kept, so as not to be a nuisance,
or injurious to health, and to be properly cleansed and emptied” (38 &
39 Vic. c. 55, s. 19).

The result of this compulsion upon local authorities to ventilate their
sewers has been the introduction of many methods to effect the purpose,
the great difficulty being to “ventilate so as not to be a nuisance or
injurious to health,” the advocates of open ventilation contending that
this is effected by having a sufficient number of openings in a sewer to
dilute and safely disseminate the foul gas with atmospheric air so that
no nuisance is caused.[193]

Many other methods have been from time to time suggested, some of which
have been carried into effect, and I will now proceed to give them in
detail, discussing their merits and objections in each case.

(1.) Open shafts are carried up from the crown of the sewer to the
centre or side of the roadway, and there protected by an open iron grid
or grating at the level of the street surface.

This is the system which has hitherto found most favour with town
surveyors, and is sometimes modified or worked in conjunction with the
practice of untrapping all the gully pits and buddle holes at the sides
of the roadway, which is an excellent plan if the theory of the
atmospheric air dilution at which this system aims is a correct one; in
fact, if this dilution by air is all that is necessary to render the
foul air in a sewer innocuous and inoffensive, there cannot be too many
openings into it.

The objections to this system are as follows:

(_a._) The foul air escaping into the public streets is often very
injurious to persons passing a ventilator, and sewers are buried out of
sight, but they are not out of mind so long as we are constantly and
unpleasantly reminded of their existence.

(_b._) It is found that a change of temperature either of the
atmosphere, or of the air in a sewer, will seriously affect the action
of a shaft, causing it sometimes to have upcast currents of air,
sometimes downcast; the effect of this latter action, especially when it
arises from the direction of the wind blowing over or into the shaft, is
frequently to drive the impure gases contained in the sewer into the
house drains, and from thence into the houses, unless they are so
trapped and ventilated as to prevent it.

(_c._) They are also affected by the fluctuations of the flow of sewage
in the sewer, or by barometric changes in the atmosphere.

(_d._) The situation of the open grids in the street is sometimes
somewhat awkward for traffic, and horses will frequently shy at them,
they also admit solid road detritus into the sewer unless they are
protected by a catch plate of some description.

(_e._) They are tempting places for children to play over, with what
results may be imagined.

(2.) Open shafts are carried up the sides (gable ends if possible) of
buildings in the neighbourhood of the sewer; these shafts may be either
open at the top, or be furnished with exhaust cowls. This system is
sometimes employed in conjunction with inlet shafts at the sides of the
street, in the manner shown by the drawing which follows:

[Illustration]

This method has the advantage over the first system I have mentioned of
carrying the smells further from our reach, but it also has the
following disadvantages:

(_a._) The distance and the number of bends and elbows the gases have to
traverse before reaching the external air.

(_b._) The difficulty of fixing them just at the points where they are
most required with reference to the gradients of the sewer, especially
if they are to be constructed of such an internal diameter as will
ensure their efficiency.

(_c._) The great objection raised by occupiers and owners of premises
against having them fixed on their premises, both on sanitary and legal
grounds.

(_d._) Their great expense.

(_e._) The effect of weather upon their currents.

(3.) By making use of the rain-water pipes from adjoining buildings.

This method commends itself as being very economical, and the
opportunities thus given for ventilation are so numerous. If sewers are
to be ventilated at all[194] it would seem at first sight that there
could not be too many openings from and into them, but this system has
the following serious objections:

(_a._) When raining, little or no ventilation can take place, and this
is the very time, owing to the rising of the water in the sewer, that
the gases should be allowed free egress if such is considered the best
manner of dealing with them.

(_b._) The position of the head of the rain-water pipe is generally the
worst that could be chosen for the egress of the gases, both on sanitary
and pneumatic grounds.

(_c._) The joints of a rain-water pipe are usually none of the best.

(_d._) The objections persons naturally have to allow the rain-water
pipes of their houses to be used for such a purpose.

(4.) By utilising the lamp posts or columns adjacent to the sewer.

The objects of this system are first to obtain a constant upward current
from the sewer, and secondly to secure that the foul gases and air shall
be consumed and rendered innocuous by being burnt. The objections to
this system are--

(_a._) The lamps are only lit at night, consequently little or no
ventilation would be going on during the day.

(_b._) The number and diameter of the lamps are generally too small to
make any appreciable effect upon the ventilation of the sewer.

(5.) By passing or filtering the foul air through charcoal placed in
trays or other receptacles in shafts.

The theory of this method is admirable, as the charcoal would arrest all
the impurities and flocculent organic matters contained in the foul air,
and allow only the pure filtered air to pass into the atmosphere.

It has been found, however, where this method has been adopted, that the
charcoal very soon becomes so caked and consolidated from damp and the
vibration of the traffic, that it will neither allow the air to filter
through, nor absorb the impurities contained in it; these objections and
the amount of attention this system requires, has not rendered it very
popular with town surveyors, although it has much to recommend it.

(6.) By making use of ordinary chimney shafts.

This method and the one which follows have some merits, the principle
being that an upward current is established as an exhaust from the
sewer, and also that the foul air is purified by being passed through
fire, but both these advantages are only gained when the fires are
actually burning; the objections to this system are--

(_a._) Structural difficulties must often be encountered and overcome.

(_b._) Possibility of explosion arising from leaks of gas mains into
sewers (a by no means uncommon occurrence, as all who have charge of
sewers frequently find to their cost).

(_c._) The objections of owners and occupiers to allow their premises to
be thus made use of to carry off a public nuisance for which they as
individuals are in no way responsible.

(7.) By lofty shafts erected at convenient positions which are either in
connection with furnaces or are simply open to the air.

For a long outfall sewer with no connections this method has many
advantages, notably so in the large furnace and shaft erected on the
Brighton outfall sewer by the borough surveyor, Mr. Lockwood. But in a
general system of sewerage, it was found by experiments made by Sir
Joseph Bazalgette, C.B. that the effect of trying to reduce the gases by
the action of furnaces was but very small, and that the area over which
the effect extended was but very limited: in fact, a sewer may be
compared to a perforated tube, the house drains, gully drains, &c.,
representing the perforations; the effect of an exhaustion by the action
of the furnace is simply to suck fresh air into the sewer at all these
points instead of removing the foul air for any distance.

High shafts at different points effect a partial clearance of sewer
gases, but they are very costly, and the reasons I have previously given
against the system of open shafts are practically the same in this and
all other modifications of the principle.

Many other methods have been tried from time to time, either to prevent
the formation of gases in the sewers, or neutralize or destroy them,
some of which are as follows:

By giving a quick velocity of discharge in a sewer; by placing materials
within sewers which would absorb the gases as fast as they were
generated; by passing deodorants or disinfectants into sewers; by
deodorizing or disinfecting all materials before they are allowed to
enter a drain or sewer; by placing chemical agents within sewers to give
off certain gases which would then, it was conjectured, destroy the
noxious properties of the sewer gases; by introducing charcoal into
sewers to absorb the foul gases; by laying pipes within the sewers for
the purpose of discharging chlorine into the sewer; by employing
galvanic agency to disengage or to produce ozone from the sewer gas; by
passing the foul air through shafts into which water was constantly
injected, and by endeavouring to extract the foul air by fans driven by
machinery.

I have myself patented a plan for “annihilating sewer gases” by allowing
them to be absorbed into dry earth, and have tried the system with some
very marked and successful results.[195]

Having thus far considered all the known methods for dealing with the
noxious emanations which proceed from sewers, the next point to consider
is what these noxious emanations are, and whether they exist in all
sewers.

It has been found that even in sewers of the best and most modern
construction what is called “sewer gas” is generated in more or less
quantity; this arises even from fresh sewage, but is far more noxious
and dangerous to health when the sewage has begun to decompose. Even
where the sewers are so constructed as to remove all the sewage to the
outfall within 24 hours (which has been decided to be the maximum time
it should take), there is still an accumulation of slime on the inner
periphery of the sewers, owing to the rise and fall of the sewage line,
which is constantly manufacturing gases of decomposition.

It is no doubt true that the more perfect the system of sewerage is the
less foul air there is in the sewers, but in very few towns will there
be found no sewers or drains where temporary obstructions of the sewage
do not occur, and where gases are generated, which then find their way
into other parts of the sewage system unless they are dealt with in some
effective manner.

As to what is the actual composition of this foul air in a sewer little
or nothing seems to be known, except that it is highly dangerous to
health if breathed, and is also very offensive to the smell.

The “fœtid organic vapour,” or sewer gas proper, has for its companions
in a sewer, sulphuretted hydrogen, a most poisonous as well as
unpleasant smelling gas, carburetted hydrogen, due very often to leaky
gas mains or services, or to decomposing vegetable matters, carbonic
acid gas or carbonic anhydride (choke damp), and some ammoniacal
compounds.

The actual component parts, however, of any gases in a sewer must vary
considerably with its conditions and locality, &c., in the same manner
as they would in any public building or room, and it is impossible to
tell, without costly experiments, what gases may be prevalent in any
particular portion of a sewer. But whatever may be the analysis of this
foul air, there can be but little doubt that it contains organic matter
floating about in it as solids, and that it is excessively injurious and
even dangerous to breathe, and that it should be caught and destroyed or
rendered innocuous, and not be permitted to pass into and contaminate
and poison the air we breathe.

Some engineers are of opinion that this foul air always finds its way to
the upper portions of the sewerage system, but my investigations into
this subject have led me to believe that no rule of this kind can be
laid down, for with quick velocities of flow, in some sewers, the gases
are carried by friction in the direction of the flow of the sewage, and
do not ascend as has been imagined.

Whatever system of ventilation of the main sewers in any town may be
adopted, it is imperative that the house drains connected with them
should be properly trapped and ventilated, and this is in my judgment of
even greater importance than the ventilation of the main sewers. On this
point I have given more explanations in the chapter upon “House
Drainage.”

In conclusion, let me refer my readers to a most exhaustive discussion,
and very valuable information contained in the chapter entitled
“Ventilation of Sewers and Drains” in Mr. Baldwin Latham’s ‘Sanitary
Engineering,’ in which may be found almost everything that is at present
known upon this important subject.

  [193] If there is any truth in the “germ theory” of disease, how
  dangerous must be the practice of open sewer ventilation, a waft of
  foul air from a sewer carrying with it a germ, and the unsuspecting
  passer-by is inoculated just as surely as if he had handled or been
  near the excrements of the diseased person whose evacuations have been
  passed into the public sewer.

  [194] The important city of Bristol has no system of sewer
  ventilation, and yet the death rate of the city, which is by no means
  specially healthily situated, has not been abnormally high up to this
  year (1883).

  [195] For further information upon my system for the annihilation of
  sewer gases, I must refer my readers to a pamphlet written by myself
  in 1880, entitled ‘Sewer Ventilation, or a New and Improved System for
  the disposal of the Noxious Gases generated in Sewers and Drains,’ and
  also to a paper I read on this subject at the meeting of the Sanitary
  Institute of Great Britain, held in Exeter in the year 1881.




CHAPTER XXIII.

PUBLIC CONVENIENCES.


In almost every town in the United Kingdom public urinals are now
erected, although it is not often that good watercloset accommodation is
provided, except at hotels and railway stations, over which the local
authority have no jurisdiction; or perhaps if they do provide any
accommodation of this description it is only in connection with the
public parks or in the markets, museums, &c.

The clause of the Public Health Act which empowers an urban authority to
spend money out of the district rates for this purpose is as follows:

“Any urban authority may if they think fit provide and maintain in
proper and convenient situations, urinals, waterclosets, earthclosets,
privies and ashpits and other similar conveniences for public
accommodation” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 39).

It is not my intention to enter into the merits or otherwise of the many
descriptions of urinals and latrines that have been brought to the
notice from time to time of every town surveyor by enterprising
manufacturers and patentees, but only to give a few suggestions upon the
subject.

Public urinals ought to be erected by the urban authority as a matter of
convenience to the peripatetic portion of any community, and also to
prevent nuisances being committed in improper places.

In selecting sites for urinals the town surveyor must take care that
after erection they shall not be offensive or a nuisance to any persons
living in the vicinity, and that they shall be so placed that although
they may be easily found, the persons using them shall be effectually
screened.[196]

Urinals are better constructed of iron rather than of brickwork or more
solid workmanship, in order that they can be readily removed. It is
surprising what an uproar is sometimes raised in a neighbourhood by the
erection of a urinal; this clamour occasionally has so much effect upon
the urban authority that they order the removal of the urinal, although
it may not have been erected many days, and if it has been substantially
built a considerable waste of the public money is thus involved.

Where a urinal is constructed with basins, as by the following plan, the
basins may be of iron or good stone ware or similar construction, these
being always kept full of water which is constantly although slowly
changing.

[Illustration]

Stall urinals may be some modification of the following plan, and be
constructed of iron with slate partitions, or the partitions may be of
iron covered with plate glass where soiled, the stalls should not be
less than 24 in. in the clear, and water must be kept constantly flowing
over the soiled portion either from a perforated pipe or a
spreader.[197] A very excellent arrangement is to have a trench or
trough cut at the foot of the stall for the whole length of the urinal,
which is kept constantly full of water and occasionally flushed, thus
avoiding nuisance in a very satisfactory manner.

[Illustration]

Provision must of course be made to efficiently drain and light all
public urinals, and arrangements should be made by which they can be
thoroughly washed once or twice a day, so as to keep every part
scrupulously clean. Urine after a very short exposure exhales a most
fœtid and unpleasant odour, from the decomposition of its nitrogenous
matter. Carbolic acid, chloride of lime, sanitas, or other disinfectant
should also be used, especially in warm weather.

If the interior of a public urinal or latrine has to be painted a light
colour, it is well to mix a little sand with the paint, so as to prevent
as much as possible that literature and art which so often disfigures
establishments of this description. An excellent composition with which
to treat urinals, although it is of a somewhat dark tint, is a mixture
of common coal tar and naphtha, which not only gives a clean and
polished appearance to the place, but is also an excellent deodorant and
disinfectant.

With regard to public W.C. accommodation, this, as I have before stated,
is not very often provided by an urban authority,[198] although common
public latrines are sometimes erected. These are generally used by
rather rough persons, and should be constructed in a strong and simple
manner.

For this purpose stoneware bowls or basins placed over a drain and
fitting into ordinary right-angled junctions placed vertically are
simple and effective as well as very economical in construction. Slate,
iron, or wood seats may be placed on these basins, which should be kept
half full of water. A periodical and sudden flush which carries the
whole contents into the nearest sewer can be arranged for so as to work
automatically by the introduction of a cistern and one of Mr. Roger
Field’s flush syphons at the upper end of the system.

For further information on the subject of urinals, waterclosets,
latrines, and all similar subjects, let the town surveyor refer to Mr.
George Jennings or Messrs. Macfarlane, who have an endless variety of
designs and appliances in connection with such matters.

  [196] The urban authority have an absolute discretion as to the sites
  they select. They cannot, however, erect public conveniences so as
  thereby to cause a nuisance, even though the convenience is wanted and
  the locality chosen suitable. (_Vide_ ‘Public Health and Local
  Government Act,’ by F. V. Fitzgerald, 3rd edition, p. 33.)

  [197] The quantity of water usually required to each stall when kept
  constantly running is about half a gallon per minute.

  [198] For an excellent specimen of such public accommodation, that at
  Liverpool near the St. George’s Hall should be inspected.




CHAPTER XXIV.

ARTIZANS AND LABOURERS’ DWELLINGS, &c.


The Artizans and Labourers’ Dwellings Act 1868 (31 & 32 Vic. c. 130) was
in effect incorporated in the Public Health Act 1875 so that “every
urban authority shall within their district, . . . have, exercise and be
subject to all the powers, rights, duties, capacities, liabilities, and
obligations within such district exercisable or attaching by and to the
local authority” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 10).

The mode of procedure is as follows:

Where the “officer of health”[199] finds any premises in a condition or
state dangerous to health so as to be unfit for human habitation, he
shall report the same in writing to the clerk of the local authority.
The local authority must then refer such report to a surveyor or
engineer,[200] who shall thereupon consider the report so furnished to
him, and report to the local authority what is the cause of the evil so
reported on, and if such evil is occasioned by defects in any premises,
whether the same can be remedied by structural alterations and
improvements or otherwise, or whether such premises or any or what part
thereof ought to be demolished (31 & 32 Vic. c. 130, s. 6).

Upon the receipt of this report from the surveyor the local authority
sends copies to the owner of the premises, giving him opportunities of
attending before them and of appealing against the report, and if his
objections are overruled, a plan and specification of the works (if
any) and an estimate of the cost of such works, must be prepared by the
surveyor, and these in turn may be inspected by the owner and objected
to by him in writing, and he may also attend before the local authority,
and if he makes good his objections the local authority may direct the
plan, specification and estimate to be amended, and the works would then
be executed in accordance with the amended plans, &c. (31 & 32 Vic. c.
130, s. 8).

Persons who are aggrieved by any order of the local authority may appeal
against it, but failing this, if the owner does not within two months
diligently proceed with and complete the same in conformity with the
specification to the satisfaction of the surveyor, the local authority
may either order the premises to be shut up, or to be demolished, or may
themselves execute the required works in conformity with the
specification (31 & 32 Vic. c. 130, s. 18).

If the requirements of the order involve the total demolition and not
the improvement of the premises, the owner shall within three months
proceed to take down and remove them, and if he fail to do so, then the
local authority may pull down and recoup the expenses by a sale of the
old material (31 & 32 Vic. c. 130, s. 20).

The above Act was amended in 1879 by the “Artizans and Labourers’
Dwellings Act (1868) Amendment Act 1879” (42 & 43 Vic. c. 64), the most
important clause affecting the action of the town surveyor being as
follows:

“Notwithstanding anything in the Act of 1868, the owner of any premises
specified in an order of the local authority made under that Act, and
requiring him to execute any works or to demolish such premises, may
within three months after service on him of the order, require the local
authority in writing to purchase such premises” (42 & 43 Vic. c. 64, s.
5).

The amount of compensation to be paid to the owner is to be settled by
arbitration if no agreement can be arrived at, such arbitration to be
carried out in a manner provided for by certain clauses in this
Amendment Act 1879.

Sec. 9 of the same Act also provides for the repayment (by sale of old
materials, &c.) of the cost incurred by the local authority in executing
any works under the Acts.

This Act has again been amended quite recently (August 1882) by “An Act
to Amend the Artizans and Labourers’ Dwellings Acts” (45 & 46 Vic. c.
54), the most important clause affecting the working of this Act being
as follows:

(1.) “If in any place to which the Artizans and Labourers’ Dwellings Act
1868 applies the officer of health finds that any building, although not
in itself unfit for human habitation, is so situate that by reason of
its proximity to or contact with any other building it causes one of the
following effects, that is to say:

  “(1.) It stops ventilation or otherwise makes or conduces to make such
  other buildings to be in a condition unfit for human habitation; or

  “(2.) It prevents proper measures from being carried into effect for
  remedying the evils complained of in respect of such other buildings,

in any such case the officer of health shall make a report to the local
authority in writing of the particulars relating to such first-mentioned
building (in this Act referred to as ‘an obstructive building’) stating
that in his opinion it is expedient that the obstructive building should
be pulled down, and shall deliver the report to the clerk of the local
authority.

“(2.) The local authority shall refer such report to a surveyor or
engineer to report thereon, and to report as to the cost of acquiring
the lands on which such obstructive building is erected, and of pulling
down such building.”

The local authority then consider the reports of the officer of health
and of the surveyor, and proceed to give copies to the owner of the
lands in question, who has liberty of appeal, &c., as before given in
the Act 1868. The lands may be acquired by the local authority by
agreement or compulsorily under the Lands Clauses Consolidation Acts,
and the obstructive building, “or such part thereof as may be
obstructive,” may be pulled “down, and the whole site, or such part
thereof as may be required to be kept open for the purpose of remedying
the evils” kept as an open space.

The owner of the land may, by giving due notice, declare that “he
desires to retain the site of the obstructive building, and undertake
either to pull down or to permit the local authority to pull down, the
obstructive building,” in which case he retains the site, and is
compensated only for the building.

These recent amendments to the old Act of 1868 are of the greatest
importance, for they aim at the easy improvement of courts and alleys,
by opening them where houses have been erected across the entrance, in
some cases depriving the courts and alleys of light and air, and leaving
only a small covered archway through which the occupants can enter.

The Act has only too recently become law for me to give any particulars
with regard to its working, but it appears to be a most valuable
sanitary Act.

Prior to these amendments of the Act 1868, it was felt that it dealt
only with isolated buildings, and consequently, in order to improve
large areas, the “Act for Facilitating the Improvement of the Dwellings
of the Working Classes in Large Towns” was passed in 1875 (38 & 39 Vic.
c. 36), since which date, like the Act 1868, it has been twice amended,
once in 1879 (42 & 43 Vic. c. 63), and again in 1882 (45 & 46 Vic. c.
54).

The object of the Act of 1875 was to facilitate the removal of portions
of towns, especially of the courts and alleys in the poorer and more
densely-populated parts.

The Act is to be put in force where an official representation is made
by the medical officer of health to the local authority of an urban
sanitary district (which must contain a population of at least 25,000)
that “any houses, courts, or alleys within a certain area” are “unfit
for human habitation, or that diseases indicating a generally low
condition of health amongst the population have been from time to time
prevalent in a certain area,” and that this is attributable to the bad
arrangement or bad condition of the streets and houses, or “other
sanitary defects,” which can only be remedied by “an improvement scheme
for the rearrangement and reconstruction of the streets or houses” (38 &
39 Vic. c. 36, s. 3).

The improvement scheme to be prepared on receipt of this report by the
local authority must be accompanied by “maps, particulars, and
estimates” (no doubt these must be prepared by the surveyor, although no
mention is made as to who shall prepare them), and this scheme may
“provide for widening any existing approaches to the unhealthy area, or
otherwise for opening out the same for the purposes of ventilation or
health.” It must distinguish “the lands proposed to be taken
compulsorily,” and by the Act 1875 it was necessary to “provide for the
accommodation of at the least as many persons of the working class as
may be displaced in the area with respect to which the scheme is
proposed in suitable dwellings, which, unless there are any special
reasons to the contrary, shall be situate within the limits of the same
area or in the vicinity thereof” (sec. 5).

So much practical difficulty was experienced in carrying this latter
part of the clause into effect, that in 1879 a short Act was passed (42
& 43 Vic. c. 63), which by the 4th section amended that part of the
original clause as to the provision of accommodation for the working
classes as follows:

“Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the confirming authority
. . . . that equally convenient accommodation can be provided . . . . at
some place other than within the area or the immediate vicinity . . . .
and it is also proved to the satisfaction of such authority that the
required accommodation has been or is about to be forthwith provided.”
The confirming authority may be satisfied with such provision, and for
this purpose the local authority may make use of any lands belonging to
them, or purchase any that are suitable (42 & 43 Vic. c. 63, s. 4).

This part of the Act has again been amended in the year 1882 by 45 & 46
Vic. c. 54, which in section 3 enacts as follows:

“. . . . and where any such improvement scheme comprises an area situate
elsewhere than in the metropolis or the City of London, it shall, if the
confirming authority so require (but it shall not otherwise be
obligatory on the local authority so to frame their scheme), provide for
the accommodation of such number of those persons of the working class
displaced in the area with respect to which the scheme is proposed in
suitable dwellings to be erected in such place or places either within
or without the limits of the same area as the said authority, on a
report made by the officer conducting the local enquiry, may require
. . . .”

Having thus far given the _modus operandi_ under which the Act has to be
enforced, it is necessary to see what are some of the town surveyor’s
duties in connection therewith.

First, there are the “maps, particulars, and estimates” which have to be
prepared, and these involve--

(_a._) Accurate surveys of the area;

(_b._) A reference of all the properties included:

(_c._) A census of the population of the area;

(_d._) A valuation of all the properties;

(_e._) A plan of the proposed new streets, &c.

(_f._) An estimate of the cost of the whole work.

In addition to this it is necessary for the local authority to “impose
suitable conditions and restrictions as to the elevation, size, and
design of the houses and the extent of the accommodation to be afforded
thereby, and to make due provision for the maintenance of proper
sanitary arrangements,” and this naturally involves detailed drawings of
the buildings to be erected.

In the same clause (38 & 39 Vic. c. 36, s. 9) it is stated that the
local authority may engage with any society, &c., to carry the whole or
any part of the scheme into effect, but “the local authority shall not
themselves, without the express approval of the confirming authority,
undertake the rebuilding of the houses or the execution of any part of
the scheme, except that they may take down any or all of the buildings
upon the area, and clear the whole or any part thereof, and may lay out,
form, pave, sewer, and complete” all the necessary streets, &c., which
shall thenceforth be public streets repairable by the inhabitants at
large.

It is scarcely necessary to say that the enforcement of this Act
involves a considerable expenditure of work and time in the office of
the town surveyor.

The buildings which are erected on the sites dealt with under this Act
are generally of the “high block” class, as it is found that the
labouring man prefers to live near his work, and land is generally too
expensive in such localities to admit of the erection of any other
description of buildings.

As to whether this class of dwelling is as healthy as ordinary cottages
or houses, the following death-rates for the year 1879 will be some
guide:

  The London Improved Industrial Dwellings          16·4 per 1000
  The Peabody Trust Dwellings                       17·2  „   „
  The Metropolitan Association Dwellings            14·3  „   „
  The Newcastle Improved Industrial Dwellings       12·0  „   „
  The general death rate for the Metropolis at the
  same date being                                   21·2  „   „

It is of course necessary that the sanitary arrangements of industrial
dwellings of the block type should be very perfect, and as to the manner
in which they should be erected the following words of Mr. John Price,
who for twelve years had lived in one of them himself, can be here given
with advantage:[201]

“Model dwellings are therefore most appreciated by working men when
placed near the scene of their daily labour. The arrangements most
preferred are those which bring the fewest families or persons in
contact with one another on a flat or landing. As a rule the buildings
should not exceed four stories in height; the staircases should be about
four feet in width, and broken by short landings, lighted by large
windows open to the external air; the window-sills should not be less
than three feet from the floors for the safety of young children, and
for the same reason well staircases should be avoided. The steps of the
stairs should only have a 6-inch ‘rise,’ for the more easy accommodation
of old people and young children; they should be fire-proof, and well
lighted with gas on an evening. There should be a thick layer of
deafening between the floors. The waterclosets should be placed in an
offshoot from the main building, opening on to each landing, and well
ventilated by open windows and air bricks. The watercloset apparatus
should be as simple and effective as possible. Patents depending upon
the proper working of valves and ball-cocks should be avoided, as the
fruitful cause of trouble and expense; little reliance must be placed on
their proper use by tenants where more than one family have access to
them. I have seen excellent closets stopped up with cloths and all
manner of earthenware and hardware, children of careless parents being
the principal offenders; what is everybody’s duty is often most
neglected. It will be found most economical in large buildings of this
class to appoint a person whose duty it should be to attend to the
proper flushing of waterclosets daily. I would suggest that there
should be a large cistern under the roof (distinct from the cistern used
for domestic purposes), a ³⁄₄-inch feed pipe should lead to each w.c.,
which should consist of a simple metal or earthenware pan, provided only
with a tap, flushing rim, and plug, placed under the seat securely, and
under the sole control of the attendant, who, by the necessary daily
inspection, would detect any stoppage or injury to the fittings. The
expense of such supervision would probably be soon saved in plumbers’
bills. Of course the soil-pipes should be well ventilated above the roof
of the building, and all drains and sinks should be properly trapped.
The attendant on his daily rounds would also be able to see that these
are kept in proper order. The dust-shaft, extending to the full height
of the building, should have proper hoppers connected with it to prevent
the dust coming from the lower or upper landings; a nuisance sometimes
complained of in block dwellings. The washhouses should be placed on the
roof or in the yards, fitted with set pots and requisite conveniences.
The soft water from the roofs should be stored in tanks for washing and
domestic purposes--it will be much appreciated by sensible tenants, and
save the water bill greatly.

“The great desiderata of these large blocks of buildings is ample
playground for the children, without which they play upon the stairs,
and are often the cause of strife amongst neighbours. I know those who
have experience in the matter may say that it is more easy to state what
is desirable than what is practical. The enhanced value of land in all
our large towns precludes any liberal investment on what appears so
financially unremunerative as playgrounds, yet they are essential
adjuncts wherever there is an infantile population. Mr. Powell, on
behalf of the London Trades’ Unions, enumerated before Sir Richard
Cross’s Committee certain objections which the working classes of London
entertained against the earliest erected blocks of dwellings, amongst
which was their barrack-like and uninviting appearance, and also their
want of playgrounds for children. Recently these defects have been
greatly remedied.”

A few words are necessary upon the “Labouring Classes’ Lodging Houses
Acts” (14 & 15 Vic. c. 34; 29 & 30 Vic. c. 28; 30 & 31 Vic. c. 28).

The object of these Acts was to empower urban authorities, under certain
restrictions and after certain formalities, to appropriate any lands
vested in them or at their disposal, or to purchase or rent the
necessary lands for the purpose of erecting suitable buildings for
lodging-houses for the working classes, or to convert any buildings into
lodging-houses, and “repair and improve the same respectively with all
requisite furniture, fittings, and conveniences”; and further powers are
given in the Acts for the urban authority to contract with persons for
different objects, &c.

I am unable to give any experiences of the working of these Acts, for I
do not know of any urban authority which has carried them into effect,
the Artizans and Labourers’ Dwellings Improvement Acts having virtually
superseded them.

The following copy of the bye-laws as sanctioned by the Treasury in 1867
in connection with the Labouring Classes’ Lodging Houses Acts may,
however, be of interest, as well as the table of sizes of rooms which
follows:

Separate watercloset accommodation to be provided for each tenement, or
else, where watercloset accommodation is to be used in common by the
occupants of two or more tenements, separate accommodation must be
provided for each sex. Such accommodation may be either watercloset,
earthcloset, or privy.

Each tenement to have a dustbin or the use of a dustbin common to
several buildings.

Each tenement to be well lighted by external windows made to open.

Each tenement to have ready access to water.

Where several tenements in one building, proper ventilation to be
provided for the passages, staircases, &c.

The drains to be well constructed.

Parties to whom moneys to be advanced to enter into covenants with the
Public Works Loan Commissioners, that where there are several tenements
in one building they

(_a._) Will cause the passages, staircases, &c., to be kept clean;

(_b._) Will cause the waterclosets, &c., to be kept in good repair;

(_c._) Will cause the dustbins to be emptied at intervals of seven days;

(_d._) Will take precautions against any interruption in the supply of
water;

(_e._) Will keep the windows in good order and repair, and the chimneys
swept;

(_f._) Will keep the drains in proper order;

(_g._) Will allow inspection by Commissioner of Works to see that the
above covenants are observed.

Number of cubic feet in each room of the several classes of tenements
(none of less than two rooms) for which money has been authorised to be
advanced:

  ------------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
                          |  One  |  One  |  One  |  One  |  One
                          |Room of|Room of|Room of|Room of|Room of
                          | cubic | cubic | cubic | cubic | cubic
           Class.         | feet. | feet. | feet. | feet. | feet.
  ------------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
  Class I. of two rooms   |   715 | 1,219 |       |       |
  Ditto                   |   816 |   994 |       |       |
  Ditto                   |   995 | 1,020 |       |       |
  Class II. of four rooms |   960 |   960 |   960 |   960 |
  Class III. of five rooms|   372 |   675 |  1056 |  1056 |  1232
  Ditto                   |   446 |   459 |   459 |   781 |  1468
  ------------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------

It may be information valuable to a town surveyor, if before closing
this chapter I draw attention to the provisions of the Municipal
Corporations Act 1882, sec. 3, which gives corporations power to convert
any corporate land into sites for working men’s dwellings, although the
corporation are not authorised to erect the dwellings thereon.

  [199] The term “officer of health,” as respects any urban sanitary
  district in England, means the medical officer of health appointed by
  the urban sanitary authority under the Public Health Act 1875 (42 & 43
  Vic. c. 64, s. 3).

  [200] The town surveyor is usually employed for this work.

  [201] _Vide_ ‘Industrial Dwellings from a Sanitary point of View,’ by
  John Price, Resident Agent, Newcastle-on-Tyne Industrial Dwellings
  Company, read September 28th, at the Congress of the Institute, held
  at Newcastle-on-Tyne.




CHAPTER XXV.

DEFECTS IN DWELLING-HOUSES, &C.


There are many defects in dwelling-houses with which it is the duty of
the sanitary inspector to deal, such as the Bakehouse Regulations Act,
offensive trades, nuisances rendering houses unfit for human habitation,
&c., but I propose to give in this chapter, in addition to those with
which I have already dealt, such subjects under this head as come within
the duties of the town surveyor.

The first which I propose to treat is that of the question of


_Cellar Dwellings._--These are at all times objectionable even if the
clauses of the Public Health Act 1875 be strictly carried out, and the
surveyor should discourage them as much as possible. Nothing more can be
said with reference to them than is contained in the provisions of the
above Act, which are as follows:[202]

“It shall not be lawful to let or occupy or suffer to be occupied
separately as a dwelling, any cellar (including for the purposes of this
Act in that expression any vault or underground room) built or rebuilt
after the passing of this Act, or which is not lawfully so let or
occupied at the time of the passing of this Act” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s.
71).

And with regard to existing cellar dwellings they are only to be let or
occupied on the following conditions:--

“Unless the cellar is in every part thereof at least seven feet in
height, measured from the floor to the ceiling thereof, and is at least
three feet of its height above the surface of the street or ground
adjoining or nearest to the same; and

“Unless there is outside of and adjoining the cellar and extending along
the entire frontage thereof, and upwards from six inches below the level
of the floor thereof up to the surface of the said street or ground, an
open area of at least two feet and six inches wide in every part; and

“Unless the cellar is effectually drained by means of a drain, the
uppermost part of which is one foot at least below the level of the
floor thereof; and

“Unless there is appurtenant to the cellar the use of a watercloset,
earthcloset, or privy, and an ashpit, furnished with proper doors and
coverings, according to the provisions of this Act; and

“Unless the cellar has a fireplace with a proper chimney or flue, and an
external window of at least nine superficial feet in area clear of the
sash frame, and made to open in a manner approved by the surveyor
(except in the case of an inner or back cellar let or occupied along
with a front cellar as part of the same letting or occupation, in which
case the external window may be of any dimensions, not being less than
four superficial feet in area clear of the sash frame).

“Provided that in any area adjoining a cellar there may be steps
necessary for access to such cellar, if the same be so placed as not to
be over, across, or opposite to the said external window, and so as to
allow between every part of such steps and the external wall of such
cellar a clear space of six inches at the least, and that over or across
any such area there may be steps necessary for access to any building
above the cellar to which such area adjoins, if the same be so placed as
not to be over, across, or opposite to any such external window” (38 &
39 Vic. c. 55, s. 72).

Where two convictions in respect of the same cellar have taken place
within three months, the local authority may close it, and recover any
expenses incurred by them in the execution of this duty (38 & 39 Vic.,
c. 55, s. 75).

The next defect in a dwelling-house which will be considered is that of


_Insufficient W.C. accommodation._--A new house may not be erected
without “a sufficient watercloset, earthcloset,[203] or privy” under a
penalty not exceeding twenty pounds[204] (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 35).

And with regard to existing premises:

“If a house within the district of a local authority appears to such
authority _by the report of their surveyor_ or inspector of nuisances to
be without a sufficient watercloset, earthcloset, or privy . . . . the
local authority shall by written notice require the owner or occupier of
the house within a reasonable time therein specified, to provide a
sufficient watercloset, earthcloset, or privy . . . . or either of them
as the case may require. If such notice is not complied with the local
authority may, at the expiration of the time specified in the notice, do
the work, provided that where a watercloset, earthcloset, or privy has
been and is used in common by the inmates of two or more houses, or if
in the opinion of the local authority a watercloset, earthcloset, or
privy may be so used, they need not require the same to be provided for
each house” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 36).

If the local authority approve, an earthcloset may be constructed
instead of a watercloset, but in this case they should make arrangements
for the supply of the dry earth and the removal of its contents.

The necessary form of notice to be served in connection with
insufficient w.c. accommodation may be as follows:

  _To the owner of the house No.        in the borough of       ._

  Whereas the above-mentioned house is situate within the district of
  the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses of       , the urban sanitary
  authority for the borough of       : And whereas it appears to the
  said urban sanitary authority that the said house is without a
  sufficient watercloset, earthcloset, or privy: Now the said urban
  sanitary authority do hereby require you, the said owner, within
         from the date of this notice to provide a sufficient
  watercloset for the use of the inhabitants of the said house. And take
  notice, that if you do not within the time above specified provide a
  sufficient watercloset, as aforesaid, to the satisfaction of the said
  urban sanitary authority, they will themselves, at the expiration of
  such time, do the necessary work to provide such closet accommodation
  as aforesaid, and proceed to recover the costs and expenses thereby
  incurred in manner provided by the Public Health Act 1875.

  Dated this        of       , 188 .

  ______________________________
  _Surveyor to the said Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses._

And where the case demands, the following note may be added below the
above notice:

  “NOTE.--The urban sanitary authority may, if they so determine,
  require a separate watercloset to be provided for each house, or they
  may permit a watercloset to be used in common by the inmates of two or
  more houses,[205] but in either case the closet itself must be
  properly constructed and provided with due means of ventilation. The
  urban sanitary authority will approve of the existing closet
  accommodation if it is perfected by means of the following works being
  carried out. (Specification of work required to be done must here be
  inserted.) The whole of the work to be executed in a workmanlike
  manner and to my entire approval.

  “It is, however, to be understood that the above notice requiring the
  work to be executed within one month will be rigidly enforced; and if
  at the expiration of that time the work be not completed, the urban
  sanitary authority will themselves proceed to execute the necessary
  work to provide proper closet accommodation in such manner as they may
  deem most advisable, without pledging themselves to the adoption of
  the method above suggested.”

  ______________________________
  _Surveyor to the said Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses._

With regard to watercloset accommodation for factories, it appears to
rest entirely with the town surveyor to draw the attention of the
sanitary authority to any case where he considers this is deficient, as
by the following clause:

“Where it appears to any local authority by the report of their surveyor
that any house is used or intended to be used as a factory or building
in which persons of both sexes are employed or intended to be employed
at one time in any manufacture, trade, or business, the local authority
may, if they think fit, by written notice require the owner or occupier
of such house, within the time therein specified, to construct a
sufficient number of waterclosets, earthclosets, or privies and ashpits
for the separate use of each sex.

“Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any such notice shall
be liable for each default to a penalty not exceeding twenty pounds, and
to a further penalty not exceeding forty shillings for every day during
which the default is continued” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 38).

In providing closet accommodation which is to be used in common by the
occupants of a number of houses, it must be remembered that it should
be of the most simple description. Any one acquainted with the working
of waterclosets situated in courts and alleys will know how badly they
are treated, and into what a fearful state of disrepair and filth they
speedily fall, as the great difficulty the sanitary inspector always
finds is to have them kept clean; “What is everybody’s business is
nobody’s.” And although by clauses 40, 41, 46, &c., of the Public Health
Act 1875 persons causing a nuisance can be punished, it is a difficult
matter to detect the person in fault, unless of course it is a
structural defect, when the owner can be summoned if it is allowed to
remain uncured.

For this reason what are known as “Fowler’s closets,” or some
modification of this principle, should be adopted in all such localities
where earthclosets or some of the dry systems are not in force, as they
are without any complicated valve apparatus or anything of the kind.

The last point to consider in this chapter is that of _Houses without a
proper supply of water_.

“Where on _the report of the surveyor_ of a local authority it appears
that any house is without a proper supply of water, and that such a
supply can be furnished at a cost not exceeding that authorised by any
local Act, or where there is not any local Act, not exceeding twopence a
week, or at such other cost as the Local Government Board may determine,
the local authority shall give notice in writing to the owner, requiring
him, within a time specified, to obtain such supply, and to do all such
works as may be necessary for that purpose,[206] and in default of his
doing so may carry out all necessary works themselves for obtaining such
supply” (_vide_ 38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. lxii.).

It is not very often that a house is found without any supply of water
at all, for if that from the mains is not laid on it is generally found
that the house is supplied from a well or from a stand-pipe in a court,
or some similar source. If the water is derived from an impure well or
other contaminated source, the following clause of the Public Health Act
1875 must be enforced in order to close the well or compel the
discontinuance of the polluted supply, when a “proper” supply of water
can be enforced in the manner I have described:

“On the representation of any person to any local authority that within
their district the water in any well, tank, or cistern, public or
private, or supplied from any public pump, and used or likely to be used
by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drinks
for the use of man, is so polluted as to be injurious to health, such
authority may apply to a court of summary jurisdiction for an order to
remedy the same; and thereupon such court shall summon the owner or
occupier of the premises to which the well, tank, or cistern belongs if
it be private, and in the case of a public well, tank, cistern or pump,
any person alleged in the application to be interested in the same, and
may either dismiss the application, or may make an order directing the
well, tank, cistern, or pump to be permanently or temporarily closed, or
the water to be used for certain purposes only, or such other order as
may appear to them to be requisite to prevent injury to the health of
persons drinking the water.

“The court may, if they see fit, cause the water complained of to be
analysed at the cost of the local authority applying to them under this
section.

“If the person on whom an order under this section is made fails to
comply with the same, the court may, on the application of the local
authority, authorise them to do whatever may be necessary in the
execution of the order, and any expenses incurred by them may be
recovered in a summary manner from the person on whom the order is
made.

“Expenses incurred by any rural authority in the execution of this
section, and not recovered by them as aforesaid, shall be special
expenses” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 70).

It is an established fact that wells within a town must always be
regarded with some suspicion, and where they exist either publicly or
privately the local authority would do well to have the water from them
analysed with a view to having them closed. Even cisterns, if not
frequently examined and cleansed, will cause the water that is stored in
them to become polluted, not only from the dust of the air settling in
them and the natural impurities of the water passing through them, but
frequently from foreign objects falling into them and decaying, such as
rats, mice, cats, and in one case that I know of, a sirloin of beef, and
in another a plumber! These remained in the cistern until the colour,
smell, and taste of the water drew the attention of the drinkers to
“something being the matter!” The cure for the chance of such cases as
these is of course the constant supply.

  [202] Any cellar in which any person passes the night shall be deemed
  to be occupied as a dwelling within the meaning of this Act (38 & 39
  Vic. c. 55, s. 74).

  [203] “In this Act (P. H. Act 1875) the term ‘earth closet’ includes
  any place for the reception and deodorization of fæcal matter
  constructed to the satisfaction of the local authority” (38 & 39 Vic.
  c. 55, s. 37).

  [204] In case of several houses together, it has been held as not
  necessary to have separate accommodation for each house, if there is
  sufficient for them collectively. (Clutton Guardians v. Pointing, 4 Q.
  B. Division 340, 48 L. J. M. C. 137.)

  [205] It is not always possible for a separate w.c. to be provided for
  each house, hence the wisdom of the law which makes it permissive for
  a local authority to allow a group of tenements to be provided for by
  several waterclosets close together.

  [206] A similar provision is made requiring the keeper of a common
  lodging house to obtain a proper supply of water (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55,
  s. 81), but it does not appear to be the express duty of the town
  surveyor to draw attention to this, as it does in the more general
  clause.




CHAPTER XXVI.

HOUSE DRAINAGE.


It would not be possible in one chapter of a book of this description to
enter into all the details and necessary apparatus in connection with
house drainage. I propose only to point out some of the town surveyor’s
duties in connection with this subject, and to add a few remarks which
may be of some service.

The definition of the word “drain” as given in the Public Health Act
1875 is as follows:

“‘Drain’ means any drain of and used for the drainage of one building
only, or premises within the same curtilage, and made merely for the
purpose of communicating therefrom with a cesspool or other like
receptacle for drainage, or with a sewer into which the drainage of two
or more buildings or premises occupied by different persons is conveyed”
(38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 4).

Although this definition is very clear, it occasionally happens,
especially in old towns, that some doubt arises as to whether an
existing conduit for sewage is a “drain” or a “sewer”[207] for though a
conduit is of small size it maybe found to be carrying the sewage of two
or more buildings, and thus is really “a sewer belonging to the local
authority.”

This difficulty often leads to litigation where a notice having been
served upon an owner of property to put in a new drain in place of one
that has been found on examination to be defective, the new work is of
course commenced at the junction with the main sewer, and it is not
until the new so-called drain is nearly completed that it is found to
be “used for the drainage” of more than one building, and is in fact “a
sewer into which the drainage of two or more buildings or premises,
occupied by different persons is conveyed” (see clause quoted above),
and is therefore repairable by the local authority (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55,
s. 13).

Where the town surveyor is in any doubt as to whether the conduit is a
drain or a sewer, he should test from whence the sewage comes by passing
diluted white lime or carbolic acid down the adjacent water-closets and
watching whether it flows through the conduit or not, but even here he
is sometimes at fault if the drains are old and dilapidated, as they do
not reach the point he is watching and he is thus misled.

In connection with the question of house drainage the town surveyor has
the following duties to perform:

(1.) To inspect all new drains that are constructed in connection with
existing buildings within his district.

(2.) To inspect all drains of new buildings that are constructed within
his district.

(3.) To inspect all defective drains within his district, serve the
necessary notices in respect thereof, and inspect the works he has
required to be executed whilst they are in progress.

(1.) With reference to the first of these duties the following is the
clause of the Public Health Act 1875 which bears upon the point:

“The owner or occupier of any premises within the district of a local
authority shall be entitled to cause his drains to empty into the sewers
of that authority on condition of his giving such notice as may be
required by that authority of his intention so to do, and of complying
with the regulations of that authority in respect of the mode in which
the communications between such drains and sewers are to be made, and
subject to the control of any person who may be appointed by that
authority to superintend the making of such communications. Any person
causing a drain to empty into a sewer of a local authority without
complying with the provisions of this section shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding twenty pounds, and the local authority may close
any communication between a drain and sewer made in contravention of
this section . . . .” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 21).

The first thing therefore that a local authority has to do is to frame
the necessary regulations and appoint a “person to superintend the
making of such communications.”

The following is given as a specimen form of the manner in which these
regulations may be compiled:[208]

  _Regulations made and ordained by the Urban Sanitary Authority for
        , as to the giving of notice before any drains are made to
  communicate with the sewers of the said Urban Sanitary Authority;
  regulating the mode in which such communications are to be made; and
  appointing the person under whose superintendence and control the work
  is to be executed._

1.--No communication shall be made with any sewer belonging to the said
Urban Sanitary Authority, nor any drain made to empty therein, unless
notice of an intention so to do, signed by the owner or occupier of the
premises to which such drains belong, be left at the office of the
borough surveyor two days previously; and such notice must specify the
point at which it is desired that communication shall be made, and the
time at which it is proposed the work shall be commenced, and any person
not complying with these regulations will be liable to a penalty not
exceeding twenty pounds.

2.--Work required to be done in connecting any house drain or drains
with the main or public sewer, shall be executed in the following
manner:

The ground to be excavated to the required depth with all possible
expedition, the work to proceed by night and day; and there shall be
maintained during the progress of the work all such fencings, hoardings,
struttings, and shorings, as may be necessary for or in consequence of
any of the works, for the protection of the public, and of all buildings
and property whatever, near to or liable to be affected by the work,
which shall also be well watched and lighted.

The shoring and strutting of the excavation is to be done in such
manner, with poling boards, waling pieces and struts, as the surveyor
shall consider necessary.

All surplus earth or material is to be carted away as speedily as
possible. Care must be taken where the excavation is made in a road or
path to keep separate the surface material from the lower, so as to
replace them in their proper positions.

The excavation shall in all cases where practicable be in open cutting,
and not by shafts and headings.

The junction with the main sewer to be done in the following manner:--

The drain shall in no case be less than four inches internal diameter,
and shall be constructed of well-burnt glazed socketed stoneware pipes,
circular, perfectly true in bore, and straight, with whole socket joints
free from flaws, blisters, cracks, or other defects, set in Portland
cement joints with a uniform fall, well bedded on well-rammed and solid
ground, the sockets being sunk into it so as to give an even bearing.
No shafts or sudden falls will be allowed.

Where the junction is with a sewer constructed of pipes, one length of
the sewer (or more if necessary) shall be removed and an oblique proper
glazed socket junction pipe, set in Portland cement, inserted in its
place.

The junction with the sewer shall be of the same size as the drain.

Where the junction is with a brick or stone sewer, the connection shall
be made at such height above the invert as the surveyor shall determine,
and be made with a glazed socket pipe obliquely in line of current of
main sewer, properly bedded in with cement, cut off so as to take the
form of the main sewer and offer no obstruction to the proper flow of
sewage therein, or with a properly constructed stoneware block junction.

On completion of the junction, which shall be made before any of the
pipe drain is laid, it shall be inspected by the surveyor, and the work
must not be further proceeded with until such inspection has been made
and the junction pronounced satisfactory. The drain shall be properly
trapped between the sewer and the house, with a syphon of such form as
the surveyor shall direct, and be at its inlet end or other extremity
carried up open its full diameter to above the roof line.

The excavation is to be filled in within six inches of the surface of
the ground, with layers of earth not more than six inches in thickness,
carefully rammed or punned with iron punners of not less weight than 10
lbs.

The surface of a roadway must be brought up to its proper level with the
surface material kept separate, and properly broken or other approved
road metal, and the roadway where broken shall be kept in repair by the
person opening the ground for a period of twelve months after the
completion of the work.

If the excavation is made under a footpath or paved road, the paving
must be made good and kept in repair for a similar period.

3.--A. B. C., the present borough surveyor, and his successors in
office, or the person for the time being acting as or discharging the
duties of borough surveyor, are hereby appointed as the person or
persons to superintend the making of such communications with the public
sewers as aforesaid.

       *       *       *       *       *

(1.) Notwithstanding the stringency of the above regulations it is very
difficult to ensure that the whole of the new drain is properly executed
by the person who is carrying out the work, for if he wishes to deceive
the surveyor’s department it is not very difficult to do so in works of
this description. It would be far better if all drains of dwelling
houses could be constructed solely by the staff of the local authority,
and failing any general act upon the subject, that they should be able
to obtain private powers to do so.

It is illegal for anyone to touch the surface of either roadway or
footpath for any purpose whatever[209] without the consent of the urban
authority (see 38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, sec. 149), and especially to touch or
interfere with the main sewers. All such work could be done better and
cheaper, both for the ratepayers and the owners of property, if carried
out by the trained staff of the local authority; nothing would be gained
by scamping the work, and one of the worst stumbling blocks in the
interests of sanitation would be removed by this simple and effective
measure. Gas and water companies invariably refuse to allow anyone to
interfere with their mains or services, but execute the work with their
own men; how much more important is it that house drains and sewers
should be equally protected. If a gas or water main or house service
leaks through defective work it is quickly detected and remedied; not so
with a drain or sewer, the deadly gases may be oozing through defective
joints or the foul liquid may be poisoning the soil under the adjacent
dwelling houses, and many victims may suffer before the cause is
ascertained, and even then laborious legal machinery has to be put in
force before it can be rectified.

The only objections that can be raised to the plan I so strongly
advocate are, first, the interference with the trade connections and
interests of builders and others; and secondly, the responsibility
incurred by the local authority to execute thoroughly sound and good
work, and the difficulty they might afterwards experience if it was
necessary to find fault with their own work. The first objection should
really have no weight when lives are at stake, and the responsibility
incurred by the second objection ought not to be shirked.

Until some alteration is made in the present law the town surveyor must
be as vigilant as he can, and endeavour to induce the public to look
more closely themselves into such all-important points.

(2.) The next duty of the town surveyor is to inspect all drains of new
buildings that are being constructed in his district.

I have dealt with this subject in the chapter on “New Buildings.” The
model bye-laws to which I have there referred contain some excellent
principles in reference to this matter, and too much power cannot be
given to a local authority in respect of house drains, even to the
extent of prohibiting any one else to construct them. The main sewer,
shared in common as it is by all the inhabitants of a town, must be
looked upon as a common danger, and each house that connects with it
should so far as possible be severed from it; at the same time the drain
must be so constructed that the sewage reaches the sewer as quickly and
as completely as possible, without any nuisance or knowledge of the
unpleasant nature of its contents or those in the sewer reaching the
inhabitants of the house: this is the key-note of all house drainage,
and many excellent books and descriptions of this class of work have
been from time to time written.

(3.) The next duty of the town surveyor is to inspect all defective
drains within his district, and serve the necessary notices, &c.

This duty is embodied in the following clauses of the Public Health Act,
1875:

“Where any house within the district of a local authority is without a
drain sufficient for effectual drainage, the local authority shall by
written notice require the owner or occupier of such house, within a
reasonable time therein specified, to make a covered drain or drains
emptying into any sewer which the local authority are entitled to use,
and which is not more than one hundred feet from the site of such house;
but if no such means of drainage are within that distance, then emptying
into such covered cesspool or other place not being under any house as
the local authority direct; and the local authority may require any such
drain or drains to be of such materials and size, and to be laid at such
level and with such fall, as on the report of their surveyor may appear
to them to be necessary.

“If such notice is not complied with, the local authority may, after the
expiration of the time specified in the notice, do the work required,
and may recover in a summary manner the expenses incurred by them in so
doing from the owner, or may by order declare the same to be private
improvement expenses.

“Provided that where, in the opinion of the local authority, greater
expense would be incurred in causing the drains of two or more houses to
empty into an existing sewer pursuant to this section, than in
constructing a new sewer and causing such drains to empty therein, the
local authority may construct such new sewer, and require the owners or
occupiers of such houses to cause their drains to empty therein, and may
apportion as they deem just the expenses of the construction of such
sewer among the owners of the several houses, and recover in a summary
manner the sums apportioned from such owners, or may by order declare
the same to be private improvement expenses” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s.
23).

The above clause is the most simple under which this duty can be carried
out, provided it can be proved that the house[210] is “without a drain
sufficient for effectual drainage,” and for this purpose it would
probably be necessary to enter the premises and open up and examine the
drain, unless, of course, it was a case where no drain existed to the
house at all, or was evidently and notoriously without “effectual
drainage.” In order to enter for this purpose the requisite powers are
conferred in the following clause of the Public Health Act 1875:

“The local authority, or any of their officers, shall be admitted into
any premises for the purpose of examining as to the existence of any
nuisance thereon, or of enforcing the provisions of any Act in force
within the district requiring fireplaces and furnaces to consume their
own smoke, at any time between the hours of nine in the forenoon and six
in the afternoon, or in the case of a nuisance arising in respect of any
business, then at any hour when such business is in progress or is
usually carried on.

“Where under this Act a nuisance has been ascertained to exist, or an
order of abatement or prohibition has been made, the local authority or
any of their officers shall be admitted from time to time into the
premises between the hours aforesaid, until the nuisance is abated, or
the works ordered to be done are completed, as the case may be.

“Where an order of abatement or prohibition has not been complied with,
or has been infringed, the local authority, or any of their officers,
shall be admitted from time to time at all reasonable hours, or at all
hours during which business is in progress or is usually carried on,
into the premises where the nuisance exists, in order to abate the same.

“If admission to premises for any of the purposes of this section is
refused, any justice on complaint thereof on oath by any officer of the
local authority (made after reasonable notice in writing of the
intention to make the same has been given to the person having custody
of the premises), may, by order under his hand, require the person
having custody of the premises to admit the local authority, or their
officer, into the premises during the hours aforesaid, and if no person
having custody of the premises can be found, the justice shall, on oath
made before him of that fact, by order under his hand authorise the
local authority or any of their officers to enter such premises during
the hours aforesaid.

“Any order made by a justice for admission of the local authority or any
of their officers on premises shall continue in force until the nuisance
has been abated, or the work for which the entry was necessary has been
done” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 102).

The above clause also gives the necessary powers of entry where the
following clause of the Public Health Act is enforced with reference to
defective house drainage, instead of the 23rd section which I have
quoted.

“On the written application of any person to a local authority, stating
that any drain, watercloset, earthcloset, privy, ashpit, or cesspool on
or belonging to any premises within their district is a nuisance, or
injurious to health (but not otherwise), the local authority may, by
writing, empower their surveyor or inspector of nuisances, after
twenty-four hours’ written notice to the occupier of such premises, or
in case of emergency without notice, to enter such premises, with or
without assistants, and cause the ground to be opened, and examine such
drain, watercloset, earthcloset, privy, ashpit, or cesspool. If the
drain, watercloset, earthcloset, privy, ashpit, or cesspool on
examination is found to be in proper condition, he shall cause the
ground to be closed, and any damage done to be made good as soon as can
be, and the expenses of the works shall be defrayed by the local
authority. If the drain, watercloset, earthcloset, privy, ashpit, or
cesspool on examination appear to be in bad condition, or to require
alteration or amendment, the local authority shall forthwith cause
notice in writing to be given to the owner or occupier of the premises
requiring him forthwith or within a reasonable time therein specified to
do the necessary works; and if such notice is not complied with, the
person to whom it is given shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
ten shillings for every day during which he continues to make default,
and the local authority may, if they think fit, execute such works, and
may recover in a summary manner from the owner the expenses incurred by
them in so doing, or may by order declare the same to be private
improvement expenses” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 41).

In acting upon the above clause it is well to note the machinery that is
necessary in order to secure success in the event of a prosecution.

(1.) The notice to the local authority of the existence of a nuisance
arising from a drain, &c., must be in writing, and that authority must
then proceed to consider the notice.

(2.) If they agree to take action the local authority may empower their
surveyor to enter the premises (with or without notice as the case may
require) but this order to him must also be in writing.[211]

(3.) If the surveyor is allowed by the occupier of the premises to enter
(and in default he must put the 102nd section which I have quoted in
force) he may then open the ground “with or without assistants.”

(4.) If he finds a defective drain he must then report to the local
authority in writing, unless he has been primarily invested by the local
authority with such powers as will dispense with such report.[212]

(5.) The local authority shall “forthwith cause notice in writing to be
given to the owner, &c.” to do the work.

(6.) If the owner executes the work the surveyor must supervise its
execution.

(7.) If this work is not done within a reasonable time the local
authority “may if they think fit” execute the works; the surveyor has
probably to carry them out, after having obtained the necessary
permission to enter for the purpose.

(8.) The costs of the work have to be recovered.

Anyone acquainted with local government will know how difficult and
tedious such processes must necessarily be, the delay between the
meetings of the local authority being quite sufficient to make the
matter in dispute last a considerable time, and this delay is extremely
undesirable where a nuisance arising from a defective house-drain is in
existence.

There seems to be no doubt that the clauses which are given in the
Public Health Act 1875 empower the local authority to specify without
dispute the class of work they think necessary in order to remedy any
evils arising from a defective drain, but it is a pity that some more
simple process cannot be introduced to improve the sanitary condition of
a house without the necessity of so much laborious legal machinery.

There is still one other clause in the Public Health Act 1875, which
refers to house drainage, and it is as follows:

“Every local authority shall provide that all drains, waterclosets,
earthclosets, privies, ashpits, and cesspools within their district be
constructed and kept so as not to be a nuisance, or injurious to health”
(38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 40). But this clause is usually taken to apply
rather to nuisances arising from temporary defects than to more
important structural defects in a drain, and such nuisances come more
under the cognizance and duties of the inspector of nuisances than those
of the town surveyor.

It would not be possible, as I have already stated, in one chapter to
give all the detail descriptions of house drains and the necessary
apparatus in connection therewith, and besides very many excellent
books, pamphlets and papers have been from time to time written on this
important subject.[213] Before, however, bringing this chapter to a
conclusion, I will give a list of the essential requirements of all good
house drainage which may be of some use to the town surveyor:

(1.) A house drain should be constructed of stoneware pipes (not
earthenware or fire clay), these are generally salt glazed, and should
be perfectly smooth or even slippery inside, the pipes must be of true
circular section and thickness of material, and straight in the
direction of their length, with whole sockets of proper depth, and free
from any cracks, blisters, sand holes, or other defects. As even the
most carefully manufactured pipes vary somewhat in diameter of sockets;
&c., it is well to have them sorted before commencing the work; it is
scarcely necessary to add that no “seconds” should be allowed on the
works.

(2.) The internal diameter of the drain should not be too large; 6
inches may be considered as a maximum, 4 inches is generally quite
sufficient to carry off all the sewage from an extensive establishment,
even if all the water from the roofs or a portion of them is included.

(3.) The inclination is governed by circumstances, but about 1 in 60 is
found to be a very convenient fall for many hydraulic, and other
reasons.

(4.) The jointing of the pipes should be executed with great care; if
cement joints are made each pipe should be jointed separately, and it
should be seen that no cement is left in the drain. Sometimes tarred
gaskin is used to prevent this, and Stanford’s patent joints are
excellent where running water or sewage has to be contended with, or
great despatch of the work is necessary.[214]

(5.) The sockets of the pipes should be sunk into the ground at the
bottom of the trench so as to give an even bearing, which amongst other
benefits dispenses with the chance of settlements.

(6.) No pipes should be allowed to be covered in until they have been
inspected by the town surveyor or his assistants, and in order to test
the soundness of the joints, it is a good plan to fill the drain with
water, having first stopped up the lower end, and note the effect.

(7.) Drains should not pass under buildings if it can be avoided, but if
unavoidable they must be buried in good concrete, and relieving arches
turned to any walls passing over them. In America iron pipes are used
under houses.

(8.) Care must be exercised, in filling in over pipes, not to break or
injure them.

(9.) The trap to a house drain should be a “Buchan” or other similar
syphon with a good cascade action, its position must be guided by
circumstances.

(10.) The drain should end at the outside wall of the house and be
carried up the wall its full diameter to above the roof for ventilation,
an inlet for fresh air being essential on the house side of the trap; if
the drain has to pass under the house it must be similarly carried up on
the other side.

(11.) The connection with the main sewer has been already described.

In conclusion I would urge the necessity of a register of all drains
being kept that are examined by the surveyor’s department. This can be
done by having a series of numbered notebooks kept solely for this
purpose, and all the information thus acquired should also be plotted on
the map of the town if on a sufficiently large scale.

The necessity of correct plans of the drainage of buildings cannot be
over-estimated, especially for hospitals, asylums, workhouses, schools,
or other public buildings, and even for the smallest dwelling house such
a plan would often prove to be the greatest boon to the occupier or
owner as well as at all times to the town surveyor, the medical officer
of health, and the inspector of nuisances.

  [207] For definitions of the word “sewer,” see the chapter on
  Sewerage.

  [208] The New York Board of Health require that earthenware drain
  pipes connecting dwellings with street sewers shall be hard and salt
  glazed, sound and cylindrical; at least ⁵⁄₈ths of an inch thick if 5
  inches in diameter, and ³⁄₄ of an inch thick if 6 inches in diameter.
  Pipe must be connected with hydraulic cement of the best quality. No
  “tempered up” cement can be used. The pipes must be laid with such
  good alignment that the inspector can see through the entire line from
  the house to the sewer, and every section must be bedded in cement so
  as to have a firm bearing, not only at the hub, but along its entire
  length. The inside of the drain must be freed from all cement which
  may have oozed through at the joints, and from all other obstructions.
  Before the drain is covered notice must be sent to the Health
  Department, by the owner or plumber, that the inspector may visit and
  examine the work, and the Board of Health will not approve or permit a
  drain which has not been examined by one of its inspectors and found
  to be properly constructed.

  [209] See chapter on “Breaking up Streets.”

  [210] The definition of house is as follows:--“House” includes
  schools, also factories and other buildings in which more than twenty
  persons are employed at one time. (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 4)

  [211] Notices, orders, and other such documents under this Act may be
  in writing or print, or partly in writing and partly in print; and if
  the same require authentication by the local authority, the signature
  thereof by the clerk to the local authority or their surveyor or
  inspector of nuisances shall be sufficient authentication (38 & 39
  Vic. c. 55, s. 266).

  [212] Having obtained admission to the premises, the inspection of the
  alleged nuisance should be so conducted as to enable the local
  authority to determine whether it exists, or whether it existed at the
  time the notice was given, and whether, although it has since been
  removed or discontinued, it is likely to recur or to be repeated; and
  in all cases it will be the most expedient course to reduce to writing
  the result of the inspection. When the inspection is made by an
  officer of the local authority, it will also be expedient for that
  authority, on receiving the report of their officer formally and in
  writing, to record the conclusions to which they have come after
  considering his report in order to ground further proceedings. (_Vide_
  ‘Law of Public Health and Local Government,’ by W. C. and A. G. Glen,
  8th edition, p. 81.)

  [213] For ample information on the subject of house drainage and
  similar subjects see the following books, etc.:-- Bailey Denton’s
  ‘Sanitary Engineering’; Baldwin Latham’s ‘Sanitary Engineering’;
  Buchan’s ‘Plumbing’; Slagg’s ‘Sanitary Work’; Hart’s ‘Manual of Public
  Health’; Hellyer’s ‘Plumber and Sanitary Houses’; Galton’s ‘Healthy
  Dwellings’; ‘House Drainage,’ by W. A. Tylor; Philbrick’s ‘American
  Sanitary Engineering,’ and many others, besides the numerous reports
  of the “Health of Towns Commission,” and several articles in the
  _Sanitary Record_, the _Sanitary Engineer of New York_, and Mr.
  Rawlinson’s ‘Hints,’ all of which should be studied by the town
  surveyor.

  [214] In some parts of the north of England taper pipes are used about
  20 inches in length, the internal diameter of the larger end being
  slightly greater than the external diameter of the smaller end, thus
  allowing the small end of one pipe to enter the large end of another.
  Continuous lengths of cement pipes made _in situ_ are also now being
  introduced.




CHAPTER XXVII.

PUBLIC PLEASURE GROUNDS AND STREET TREES.


Amongst the clauses of the Public Health Act 1875 which affect the
duties of the town surveyor will be found the following:

“Any urban authority may purchase or take on lease, lay out, plant,
improve, and maintain lands for the purpose of being used as public
walks or pleasure grounds, and may support or contribute to the support
of public walks or pleasure grounds provided by any person whomsoever.

“Any urban authority may make bye-laws for the regulation of any such
public walk or pleasure ground, and may by such bye-laws provide for the
removal from such public walk or pleasure ground of any person
infringing any such bye-law by any officer of the urban authority or
constable” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 164).

There are very few, if any, cities or towns in this country that have
not availed themselves of this clause, even if they did not already
possess one if not more public parks or pleasure grounds of some
description, these having either been given by some benevolent citizen
or acquired in some other manner by the urban authority.[215]

Included in the powers given by the above clause are no doubt those
regulating the acquisition and support of recreation or public
playgrounds, public walks, or old city walls or other places, and
disused burying grounds.[216]

In connection with the above clause of the Public Health Act, the town
surveyor may have the following duties to perform:

To advise his corporation upon the value, suitability, and desirability
of any site that is intended for use as a public park or recreation
ground, and after its acquisition to adapt it for the requisite
purposes. To effect this it must be drained and laid out with
carriage-drives, walks, lawns, flower-beds, plantations, and sometimes
streams, waterfalls, and lakes. He must design and erect the necessary
lodges, entrance gates, fences, shelters, seats,[217] band-stands, and
fountains, and must afterwards superintend the maintenance of these and
the rest of the works in connection with the pleasure ground.

It would be impossible to lay down any rules for the guidance of a
surveyor in carrying out these works, for each case must be dealt with
as its exigencies require, and a great deal of common sense, as well as
engineering, architectural, and artistic skill must be displayed by him
in carrying out any works of this description, details of which could
not possibly be given in a book of this size dealing with so many
subjects.[218]

A few suggestions may, however, be of some service on these points.

Public playgrounds for children should be composed of large, level,
well-rolled, gravelled spaces, with a few trees for shade, and some
sheds for shelter. Turf soon gets spoiled and worn bare, when it is not
so pleasant as well-rolled gravel, as it is far more dusty in dry
weather and very damp in wet, besides having an uncared-for appearance.

In public parks, shrubs planted singly directly on the lawns without any
beds around them have a very pleasing look, although it adds somewhat to
the difficulty of mowing the grass. The grass itself is greatly improved
if it is well dressed with manure in the spring and constantly watered
all the year round.

Paths should be gravelled in the autumn, care being taken to wait until
all the leaves have fallen, which are swept up and removed at once. A
good fence for a path, if any protection is necessary, is either a
strained wire fence or cast-iron hoops representing bent sticks. They
are both cheap, and stand well against weather and rough treatment.

A very economical and neat border to the footpaths can be made from the
old used-up flagstones from the foot pavements of the streets, these cut
up and placed on edge, especially if in conjunction with a pitched
channel gutter of pebbles, look remarkably well.

Ornamental flints make a pretty border, but they are nasty things for a
child to fall upon.

For flower-beds a flat border or edge of ivy has a very telling effect.
If there are ponds or lakes in the park there should be a broad path or
road close to the water’s edge. It is surprising what a great advantage
in effect this has over the plan of leaving a strip of green between the
path and the water.

The selection of the proper shrubs for a park and their distribution is
a matter that requires the advice of an expert gardener. The following
list of ordinary shrubs that will thrive well almost anywhere in this
country may however be of use for reference:

  Aucubas.
  Azaleas.
  Box.
  Berberises.
  Euonymus.
  Hollies.
  Ivies.
  Laurels.
  Lilacs.
  Mahorrias.
  Pampas grass.
  Privet.
  Rhododendrons.
  Thorns.
  Yuccas.

With regard to the selection of trees, this also requires skilled
advice, but a list is given further on in this chapter, of trees
suitable for street planting, which may be also some guide in this
respect.

In high gales of wind the surveyor may be expected to endeavour to save
valuable trees in a public park from being blown down. This may
sometimes be effected by a judicious application of chains or ropes, but
the better plan is to keep all trees well pruned and as free as possible
from “top hamper” and undue leverage from overhanging limbs.

On the pruning of trees and the removal of large limbs I must refer my
readers to a most admirable little book recently published in America,
being a translation from the celebrated ‘Treatise on Pruning Forest and
Ornamental Trees, by A. des Cars,’ which enters most fully into the
subject, and being of great practical value, should be studied by anyone
who has anything to do with the care of forest or other trees.[219]

With regard to the planting of trees along the sides of streets, our
French neighbours are much in advance of us.[220] It is true that in
this country, owing to the much larger consumption of coal as a domestic
fuel, there is more soot in the air, but it is erroneous to suppose that
trees will not thrive well in England. No doubt the moisture of our
climate causes the soot or “blacks” to adhere to the leaves and limbs of
the trees, but for that reason deciduous and not evergreen trees should
be selected for planting in towns, and these, if well chosen and
carefully planted, will most undoubtedly fully repay their first cost
and maintenance by the additional beauty to the street, the agreeable
shade they cast, and their generally healthful action on the population.

In selecting trees to plant along the sides of the streets or roads in
any towns, it is well to bear in mind that the following qualities are
necessary:--

The tree must be hardy; it must not be affected by a long-continued
drought; heat must not wither it nor make it look rusty; it must be able
to withstand dust, smoke, soot, foul air, and the insidious attacks of
insects, and be able to recover from any malicious or accidental injury
it may receive.

The tree must be of rapid growth, and develope a straight, clean stem
with shady foliage. It must be graceful either in full leaf or when bare
as in winter; its roots must not require too much room, and they must be
able to withstand the effects of pollution or rough treatment.

Although the foregoing list of requirements may seem rather formidable,
yet amongst the trees whose names now follow there will be found some
which meet many, if not all of these requirements, and which, if
properly planted with all reasonable care, may be expected to thrive if
planted at the sides of the streets in any town in this country.

LIST OF TREES SUITABLE FOR PLANTING AT THE SIDES OF STREETS.

  Western Plane.
  Lime.
  Maple.
  Horse Chestnut.
  Elm.
  Tulip tree.
  Lombardy Poplar.
  Ash.
  Willow.
  Beech.
  Birch.
  Oak.
  Sycamore.
  Copper Beech.
  Pawlonia.
  Ailantus Glandulosa.
  Laburnum.
  Lilac.
  Almond.
  Peach.
  Hawthorn.
  Acacia.
  Double Cherry, etc.

Of the above list the western plane for many reasons is the most
desirable. Its freshness when it bursts into green buds is well known,
and it is proverbial for its hardiness.

The lime was at one time the most popular tree for this purpose, but it
has several defects, the most notable being that its leaves wither
before the summer is over, and the tree assumes a lifeless look at a
time when most shade and freshness are required of it.

Of the remainder of the trees I have enumerated some are slow in growth,
which is a considerable drawback; others are not wholly free from being
affected by cold winds in the spring or by lice in the winter, and the
assistance of an expert is very necessary in selecting trees for this
important purpose.

Whatever trees are selected, the following precautions should be taken:

The young tree should have been well nourished in its nursery before
removal, and should on no account be planted in the street until its
stem is nearly 10 feet in height and about 3 inches in diameter. The
stem should be clean and straight, and the whole tree symmetrical.

The great difficulty in this country is to obtain sufficient numbers of
trees of the exact size and description, when it becomes necessary to
plant out a street. They have often to be imported, when it is found
that they are frequently unsuited both for soil and climate, besides
being very costly; thus many failures have arisen in consequence. To
obviate this necessity in Paris the Government have for many years
instituted and maintained special nurseries where trees are grown for
this purpose alone, these nurseries being situated at Passy, the Jardin
Fleuriste, and Petit Buy, no less than 115 men being constantly employed
in the work. Some further particulars will be given presently on the
cost of this work.

The trees thus nourished and selected should be planted in the autumn,
for there is a well-known saying that “a tree planted before Christmas
can be _ordered_ to grow; if planted after Christmas it must be _asked_
to do so”; and there is no doubt that if trees are planted too late in
the season great difficulty in getting them to grow is generally
experienced.

The excavated pits must be well drained, and filling the bottom of the
pit with rubble is a good plan. The further the tree can be planted from
the kerb the better, so as not only to give it a larger body of soil,
but to lessen the risk of killing the tree by the pollution of the
ground with gas from a defective main, and also excess of moisture from
the channel gutters. The distance apart of the trees is a matter of
choice. In Paris this is only 16 to 18 feet, but I think half a chain
(33 feet) is quite close enough; it economises trees and gives plenty of
room for the limbs of each tree to spread, and the intermediate
lamp-posts, watering hydrants, or other standards are not crowded out.

Each tree should have a cast-iron grating around its roots similar to
the following drawing:--

[Illustration]

This should be about 4 feet square. It prevents the ground getting hard
about the trees, and permits air and water to enter to the roots. It
also makes it easy to give any attention to the trees that they may
require when young, such as manuring, digging, &c.

The tree should also be protected with a slight iron grill or railing to
prevent mischievous persons from cutting their names on the trunk,
climbing up into the tree, or breaking off its branches whilst still
young. The following sketch shows the description of grill necessary,
which is light, cheap, and at the same time effective.

[Illustration]

The following interesting particulars of the manner in which street
planting of trees is conducted in Paris will be useful, and are given
_in extenso_:[221]

“When the boulevarde is marked out and levelled, if the soil is of bad
quality, as is nearly always the case, trenches are dug in the footway
from one end of the boulevarde to the other. The width of this trench is
usually about 6 feet, and its depth 4 or 5; and before filling it in
drain-pipes are laid along the sides made with lapped joints so that the
roots shall not enter between them. The trench is then filled with good
garden earth, raising it a little higher than the level so as to allow
for settling. In this ground the trees are planted about 6 yards apart.
They should be carefully chosen with perfect roots, and moderately
pruned. Formerly the stem was cut at about 9 feet from the ground, but
this had the bad effect of preventing the top of the tree from being
straight, and the practice has been given up. The trees are next staked
and tied with wire over a neat wad of straw, which prevents all injury
to the stem. A protecting cage, neither heavy nor very expensive, is
placed round the tree to prevent accidents; and if the weather be at all
dry at the time of planting, the trees are copiously watered.”

The cost of planting a tree in the Paris boulevarde is thus given:[222]

                                                      fr. c.

  15 cubic metres of excavation at 4 francs          =60·00
  15 cubic metres of vegetable mould at 4 francs     =60·00
  Training poles about 5 metres in height            = 1·50
                                                     ------
                                                     121·50
  Average deduction of 15 per cent. resulting from
  letting by tender                                   18·23
                                                     ------
                  Price by contract                  103·27
  Pipe drainage and materials                         11·15
  Watering appliance (average)                         2·50
  Cast iron grating round the base                    46·69
  Transport of tree from nursery                       2·00
  Planting, including stakes                           3·00
  Iron basket (to protect stem)                        8·70
  The tree                                             5·00
  Labour for planting                                  1·69
                                                     ------
                                                     184·00

The maintenance of each tree costs 1·58 francs.

The total cost, therefore, of each tree capitalised reaches about 8_l._,
and its life is said not to exceed twelve years.

Before closing this chapter it is well to advert to the evident
importance that the legislature attach to the planting and preservation
of trees along the sides of the public streets in this country and their
desire to protect them, as the following clause of the Public Health Act
1875 will show. “. . . Any person who, without the consent of the urban
authority, wilfully displaces or takes up, or who injures the pavement,
stones, materials, fences, or posts of, _or the trees_ in any such
street shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five pounds, and to a
further penalty not exceeding five shillings for every square foot of
pavement, stones, or other materials so displaced, taken up, or injured;
he shall also be liable in the case of _any injury to trees_ to pay to
the local authority such amount of compensation as the court may award”
(38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 149).

It is a great source of regret that mischievous persons can be found who
by their wilful malice injure the trees planted at the sides of streets
out of the public funds and with great expense and trouble.

  [215] By the “Commons Act 1876,” powers were given to acquire and lay
  out commons for purposes of public recreation, etc.

  [216] Upon this latter point _Vide_ 24 & 25 Vic. c. 61, s. 21.

  [217] As a preservative against the malicious disfigurement of wooden
  seats, I have seen the following inscription placed upon some seats in
  an old public park, “Never cut a friend,” and it had apparently the
  desired effect.

  [218] As an instance of the size and importance works of this
  description may assume, the Bois de Boulogne, Paris, is an example. It
  covers an area of 2000 acres, of which one half is forest, one quarter
  is grass, one-eighth roads, and about 70 acres is water. One of the
  most beautifully arranged public parks in this country is Sefton Park,
  Liverpool, where the most perfect arrangements of lawns, plantations,
  lakes and drives, have been carried out.

  [219] ‘A Treatise on Pruning Forest and Ornamental Trees,’ by A. des
  Cars, translated from the 7th French edition, with an introduction by
  Charles S. Sargent, etc. Published by A. Williams and Co., Boston,
  U.S.A., 1881.

  [220] In Paris in the year 1880, there were 90,000 trees in the
  streets, besides 20,000 more in the cemeteries. (_Vide_ Report of Mr.
  Till, the Borough Surveyor of Birmingham, 20th December, 1880.) There
  are also upwards of 8000 seats in public places; the trees and seats
  costing nearly 100,000_l._ per annum to maintain.

  [221] _Vide_ ‘The Parks, Promenades, and Gardens of Paris,’ by W.
  Robinson, F.L.S., 1869, p. 128.

  [222] _Vide_ ‘L’Architecte,’ 20th November, 1880, p. 370.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

PUBLIC ABATTOIRS.


The following is the clause of the Public Health Act 1875 which empowers
an urban authority to establish public slaughter-houses (or
“abattoirs“[223] as they are sometimes called) for the purposes of the
district they govern:

“Any urban authority may, if they think fit, provide slaughter-houses,
and they shall make bye-laws with respect to the management and charges
for the use of any slaughterhouses so provided.

“For the purpose of enabling any urban authority to regulate
slaughter-houses within their district, the provisions of the Towns
Improvement Clauses Act 1847, with respect to slaughter-houses, shall be
incorporated with this Act.[224]

“Nothing in this section shall prejudice or affect any rights, powers,
or privileges of any persons incorporated by any local Act passed before
the passing of the Public Health Act 1848, for the purpose of making and
maintaining slaughter-houses” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 169).

The great necessity for the establishment of one or more public
slaughter-houses in any town can only fully be realised by persons who
will take the trouble to inspect those which are private; they are
generally placed near the shops of the butchers for the sake of
convenience, the result being that they are situated in the central
portions of the town and are thus surrounded by closely packed
dwellings. The private slaughter house often consists of a stable or
shed which has been converted into an ill-designed slaughter-house,
badly paved, with imperfect drainage; they are frequently not
sufficiently lighted, ventilated or drained, and are utterly unfitted
for the purposes for which they are used.

Their position also is often so badly chosen that the children in the
vicinity resort there to see the animals killed, and the poor beasts
have in some cases to be driven through a narrow passage into the
slaughter-house itself, where, trembling at the sight and smell of the
blood and carcasses of its dead companions, it remains tethered until
its turn comes to fall a victim to the blow of the slaughter-man: a blow
which sometimes has often to be repeated before its object is attained,
owing to the bad light and cramped surroundings of the place.

As these slaughter-houses are generally rented by the butcher using them
at large rentals (such accommodation being scarce), it is not to be
expected that he will spend much money to improve property which is not
his own; but notwithstanding the loss of weight incurred by the animal
to be slaughtered thus fretting and sweating in its terror, the damage
to the meat by its being dressed in the same locality with the live
beast, steaming and smelling in the vicinity, and the exorbitant rents
demanded, still there are great objections always raised by butchers in
towns to the establishment of public slaughter-houses. These objections
are based by them on the following grounds:

They contend that the carriage of the meat from the slaughter-house to
their shop deprives them of some of their profits; that slaughtering
their animals in the presence of other butchers leads to disparaging
remarks and trade jealousies, and that they sometimes are robbed of fat,
tools, &c.

These arguments are groundless if the public abattoir is properly
designed, is in a suitable locality, and is well managed.

There are no powers by which butchers can be compelled to abandon
private slaughter-houses, and use those provided by the urban authority,
so long as the bye-laws of the authority are not infringed; but as the
law stands at present, private slaughter-houses may be licensed (10 & 11
Vic. c. 34, ss. 125, 126) or registered (10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, s. 127),
and the only manner in which they could be closed (which would then
compel the butcher to use the public abattoir) would be by putting the
129th section of the same Act in force, which states that the justices
before whom any person is convicted of killing or dressing cattle
contrary to the provision of the Act, or of the non-observance of any
bye-law or regulation of the local authority, in addition to the penalty
may suspend _the licence_ for any period not exceeding two months; or in
the case of the owner of any _registered_ slaughter-house may forbid for
any period not exceeding two months, the slaughtering of cattle therein.
For a second or other subsequent like offence, in addition to the
penalty the justices may revoke the licence or absolutely forbid the
slaughtering of cattle in the particular house or yard. In such an event
the local authority may refuse to grant any _licence_ whatever to the
person whose licence has been revoked, or on account of whose default
the slaughtering of cattle in any _registered_ slaughter-house has been
forbidden.

With reference to the establishment anew of the business of a
slaughterer of cattle in London, the following particulars required to
be deposited by the applicant with the Metropolitan Board of Works will
be useful.

A plan of the premises and sections of the building drawn to a scale of
¹⁄₄-inch to the foot and showing the proposed or existing arrangements
for drainage, lighting, ventilation, and water supply, with a key plan
of the locality, have to be deposited, as well as replies to the
following questions:

(1.) State what place for the accommodation or poundage of the cattle
about to be slaughtered is provided; if such place has an entrance way
for the cattle otherwise than through the slaughter-house; if separated
from the slaughter-house by a brick partition with a door; and also what
provision is made therein for watering animals.

(2.) State if slaughter-house and its poundage is within 20 feet of an
inhabited building; and if it has any entrance opening directly on a
public highway.

(3.) State if the entrance to the premises is apart from and independent
of any shop or dwelling-house; if from a street at the side or rear; and
also the height of the entrance gates.

(4.) State the dimensions of the slaughter-house, length, breadth,
height to eaves, and construction of the roof; and give similar
information about the poundage.

(5.) State if slaughter-house and poundage are drained by glazed pipes
communicating with public sewer, or how; how drains are trapped; and if
gratings have openings greater than three-eighths of an inch across.

(6.) State if floors are below level of outside road or footway, and if
paved with asphalte, or flag-stone set in cement, or how.

(7.) State how walls of slaughter-house are constructed, and if they are
covered with hard smooth and impervious material to a height of at least
4 feet; and, if so, state what material is used, and to what height it
is carried.

(8.) State how slaughter-house and poundage are lighted, if with
lantern, sky, or side-lights, or otherwise.

(9.) State how ventilated, if by openings, windows, louvre boards, or
otherwise.

(10.) State what provision is made for water-supply, the capacity of the
cistern, and at what height it is placed above floor level.

(11.) State if any watercloset, privy, urinal, cesspool, or stable, is
within, or communicates directly with the slaughter-house.

(12.) State if any rooms or lofts are constructed, or proposed to be
constructed, over the slaughter-house.

(13.) State if the premises will be provided with all the necessary and
most approved apparatus and tackle for the slaughtering of cattle.

Having thus far dealt with private slaughter-houses, I will now turn to
the question of the provision of public establishments of the kind by
the urban authority, for it is usually the duty of the town surveyor to
advise his corporation upon such a matter.

First, as to the site of the proposed public abattoir, this depends
greatly upon what sites are at the command of the town; it should if
possible be near the cattle market to prevent the passage of animals
through the streets, not only on account of the great public
inconvenience, but also the loss of weight to the animal[225] and the
heated and bad state into which its blood becomes from the exercise, and
the violent blows of the drovers’ sticks.

The site would be isolated and yet not too far from the shops of the
butchers, or the cost of carriage of the meat will be considerable; it
is almost needless to say that it should be easily and effectively
drained, and the more air with which it can be surrounded the better. It
is imperative that the entrance for the live beasts should be separate
from the exit of the dead meat, and the approach roads to the site
should not be narrow.

In laying out the site every town surveyor must use his own judgment,
but the following plan on which the site of the excellent public
abattoir at Manchester is laid out may serve as some guide for this
purpose, although of course this establishment is on a very large scale
indeed, and is in connection with a carcass market more than 500 feet
in length:

[Illustration: PLAN OF MANCHESTER SLAUGHTER-HOUSE.]

In designing an abattoir on a large scale provision for the following
accommodation should be considered.

(1.) _Lairs for cattle and pens for sheep._

These should be separated from the slaughter-house by a smaller
temporary lair in which the beast whose turn has come can be fastened to
the halter by which he is dragged into the slaughter-house, the sides of
the door-way being lined with iron for this purpose. The paving of the
lairs may be of asphalte, but care must be taken that near the door of
slaughter-house, the paving is of pitchers or something that is not at
all slippery, as here the frightened beast often struggles and draws
back when he sees the “engines of destruction” in the slaughter-house,
and smells the blood of those who have gone before.

The lairs must be thoroughly well drained, lighted, and ventilated, and
troughs for hay and water placed for each beast, for although the
animals are not expected to remain long in the lairs before being
killed, still it is very important that they should be well and kindly
treated, and rest, so that they may obtain their normal condition before
being killed.

A door easily closed should shut off the lair from the slaughter-house,
as it is open to question, if animals do not see with fear the hapless
fate of their comrades; for this and other obvious reasons the animals
must on no account be permitted to pass through the slaughter-house to
reach the lair.

The lairs should be well lighted artificially, as a great deal of
slaughtering is conducted before and after daylight.

(2.) _The slaughter-houses._

These may be separate or in one long building used in common by the
butchers; both systems have their advantages and disadvantages.

The long building has the advantage of greater economy in erection and
of management, as one inspector can see from end to end of it. Where
also a large site is not available greater advantage can be taken of a
slaughter-house erected on this plan, as several butchers can slaughter
in turn; the lairs, however, must be kept separate. The butchers do not
like this plan, but prefer privacy, and a great deal of “horse play” is
sometimes indulged in by the slaughtermen at work in a large building.
The method of payment for the use of a slaughter-house of this
description cannot well be by rent, but by head of animal slaughtered,
and this is open to the objection of possible fraud. It is necessary
also to have separate slaughter-houses for the sheep and the pigs.

Whether the slaughter-houses are constructed separately or in one long
building, the detail requirements are much the same.

The pavement of the floor should be placed on concrete and it should be
constructed of some material that is easily cleansed, is impervious to
moisture, and is not slippery either wet or dry. It must also be of
sufficient durability, and be strong enough to bear the weight of the
dead-meat carts which have to back in over it under the beams carrying
the carcasses, should there be no dead meat market in connection with
the slaughter-house as at Manchester, Dundee, &c.

The requirements of such a floor are met by good natural compressed or
mastic asphalte. The necessary holes for the reception of the flaying
sticks used in many parts of England can be easily managed by inserting
either small brass sockets specially made, or more simply by pieces of
gas-pipe cut into lengths of about an inch set tight in the asphalte.

The walls of the slaughter-house must be of sufficient strength to carry
the beams or girders of the overhead hoisting gear, as well as some tons
of hanging carcasses, as will presently be explained.

The inside of these walls must be lined to a height of about 6 feet
above the floor line with some material which is impervious and easily
cleansed. Glazed white tiles or bricks are sometimes used for this
purpose, but are apt to get chipped or broken, and I have found that
asphalte, although dark in colour, answers the purpose admirably, and is
much cheaper.

With regard to the drainage of the slaughter-house, this should, if
possible, be so arranged that there are no gratings or gully-pits in the
house itself. The floor should fall about 1 in 30 from the lairs to the
cart doors, so that everything should pass outside into a gutter in
which the necessary gratings and gully-pits can be arranged. If this is
thought to be objectionable, pits with double gratings, the lower one
being only a plate with perforated holes, can be placed in the
slaughter-house so as to prevent any solid matter whatever from entering
the drains, and these pits can be united by short drains with gully-pits
outside. The double grating should in any case be inserted, as by this
means all solid matter is kept out of the drains: a very important
consideration.

The cart doors should be made sliding, and not hinged, or great
inconvenience will be experienced, and they must be made wide enough for
the carts to back in easily.

In some slaughter-houses the killing ring to which the beast is attached
whilst the blow from the poleaxe is given[226] consists of a strong
horse-shoe shaped piece of iron projecting about 24 inches from the wall
at a height of about 18 inches, and having a ring in the top curve,
thus--

[Illustration]

whilst in others the killing ring is on the floor, thus--

[Illustration]

and in others an iron pillar standing up from the floor is used, which
is considered the best plan, as the beast should stand in a natural and
easy position at about a right angle from the feller.

The lighting of the slaughter-house should be effected from the roof, as
a good and steady light is essential to the men engaged in this
business. An awkward cut may seriously damage good beef or mutton. Care
must, however, be taken to exclude the glare of the sun, and the
ventilation should be carefully arranged by louvres easily manipulated.

Water should be plentifully laid on at a good pressure, so as to ensure
thorough flushing, &c., and the necessary taps should be recessed in the
walls, as everything in a building of this description should be kept as
flush as possible, or it will be damaged. In some slaughter-houses hot
water is laid on, and this is a great boon to the butchers and much
appreciated by them.

Gas must of course be laid on, as much slaughtering takes place during
the night.

The machinery for hoisting the beasts and slinging the carcasses
requires to be effective, simple, and very strong, as it is subjected to
the roughest treatment, and such machinery has been patented and is
erected by Messrs. John Meiklejon and Son, of Dalkeith, on very
reasonable terms.[227]

This machinery hoists the beast by simply pulling on an endless chain.
It remains suspended at any height, and can be equally easily lowered.
The divided carcass can be placed upon hooks at any point along the
girders above without being touched, and it can be taken off again and
lowered on to a man’s shoulders or into the cart direct, and in fact,
speaking from my own experience, this machinery is very perfect.

The carcasses of the sheep are hung by hand upon hooks projecting from
rails which are placed at a convenient height around the walls of the
slaughter-house.

In some abattoirs the sheep slaughter-houses are distinct from those
used for killing beasts, and this method has many advantages.

Before proceeding to describe the further requirements of an abattoir or
group of slaughter-houses, I think the following plan will be of use to
show the arrangement which I have described with regard to lairs and
slaughter-houses:--

[Illustration: PLAN

SECTION THROUGH A.B.]

The following plan shows the arrangements adopted in the Metropolitan
Cattle Market slaughter-houses:

[Illustration: METROPOLITAN CATTLE MARKET SLAUGHTER-HOUSES.]

(3.) _The condemned meat department._

This should consist of a lair for suspected cattle, a lair and
slaughter-house for the condemned cattle similar to that already
described, and a condemned meat store: this being the place where not
only all the diseased animals’ carcasses are temporarily stored pending
destruction, but also any meat of sound beasts that may have gone bad
after killing, &c. The whole of the meat thus placed in the condemned
store must be taken to the boiling-down house, where it is destroyed by
being boiled down to fat, which is disposed of for various trade
purposes.

The following description of the method employed for this purpose at the
Deptford Foreign Cattle Market will here be of use:[228]

“There are several killing houses for diseased cattle, and excellent
apparatus for boiling down condemned meat. For this purpose two boilers
are suspended from a strong platform through which they pass, and the
bottoms of them are several feet above the floor. They are each 4 feet 6
inches in diameter and 10 feet in length under platform. At the bottom
the cylinder tapers to 2 feet 8 inches in diameter. Under this there is
a semispherical bottom to the boiler hinged and kept shut by a
back-weighted lever and screws. On the top of each there is a
semispherical cover and safety valve.

“There is an iron crane and windlass for lifting off and on the covers.
After the boilers are charged with diseased meat the covers are made
secure and steam let into them near the bottom. There is a cock in the
bottom of each for running off the liquid at certain stages into a trap
grating in the floor under it, and conducted into a cement cistern
outside of the boiling-house, from which it is periodically removed.
Whether any use is made of the tallow produced I am not informed. The
bones when removed are quite porous, of a very white colour, and nearly
as light as cork. I presume that they will be sold for being converted
into bone manure. I understand these large boilers are not very often
used, and that a small close galvanized iron cylinder, 2 feet 9 inches
in diameter, and 2 feet 6 inches high, placed 15 inches above the
ground, having cock at bottom, steam pipe at side, and portable lid,
does most of the work very efficiently.”

(4.) _The pig-killing department._

This should be separate from the ordinary slaughter-house, as the styes
for pigs must be differently arranged to the cattle lairs, and a boiler
house is necessary, as boiling water must be had for scalding and
dressing the carcasses. Special iron troughs with false bottoms have
been arranged by Messrs. Meiklejon, which greatly facilitate this part
of the butcher’s work, and simple hoisting apparatus over these troughs
lifts the carcase in and out, and carries it off to the cooling or
hanging room, which must of necessity be separate from the killing and
scalding rooms. Drainage, lighting, ventilation and floors should be
similar to those described for the slaughter-houses, and plenty of lime
wash can be used with advantage here as well as in the main
slaughter-house.

(5.) _The blood house._

The blood of the slaughtered animals, which formerly was allowed to run
away, has been found to contain a most valuable aniline dye, and for
this purpose it is now collected and taken to the blood-houses, where in
order to obtain this dye it is necessary to place the blood in shallow
tins, where it is warmed by steam-pipes, the liquid is then drawn off,
which is the albumen from which the dye is extracted, the residuum left
in the trays is of the consistency of jelly, and is sold for manure.

(6.) _The tripery._

This is provided in large abattoirs for the purpose of preparing the
tripe and feet of the slaughtered animals, and in the Glasgow public
slaughter-houses this is effected by the corporation free of charge by
special machinery adapted for the purpose.

(7.) _The tallow market._

Where tallow is melted down, and moulded in shapes for manufacturers’
uses.

(8.) _The hide store._

This is where the hides and sheep skins are weighed and temporarily
stored, sometimes in connection with this are--

(9.) _Sale rooms_; for the hides, skins of sheep, &c., and tallow.

In addition to the above requirements may be mentioned,

(10.) _A superintendent’s dwelling-house and office._

(11.) _A gate keeper’s dwelling-house and office._

(12.) _A weighing machine and office._

(13.) _A convenient room_ for the meetings of the committee of the
corporation having charge of the slaughter-house.

(14.) _Waiting rooms_ for dealers, drovers, slaughtermen, and butchers,
&c.

(15.) _Store-rooms and a joiner’s workshop._

(16.) _Stables and shedding_ for the horses and carts of the jobbers and
butchers, &c.

(17.) _Lofts for straw and hay_; the former should be provided free by
the corporation, the latter on payment of so much per diem for each
beast.

(18.) _The necessary urinal and w. c. accommodation._

With regard to the provision to be made for storing the dung and waste
refuse from public slaughter-houses, I am strongly of opinion that there
should not be any fixed receptacle for such matters, but that covered
carts should be provided, which could stand in convenient positions and
be removed every day, a fresh and clean cart being substituted at once
for the one removed; by this means all nuisance is avoided.

Speaking of public abattoirs, in a recent lecture on Industrial
Nuisances, Dr. C. W. Chancellor, of the Maryland State Board of Health
U.S.A., gives some advice on the management of slaughter-houses. He
says: “During the process of slaughtering as much care as possible
should be taken to prevent the discharge of blood or other animal matter
upon the floor of the slaughter-house, upon the surrounding earth, or
into an open stream. The contents of the viscera should, with the blood,
offal and other garbage, be placed in impervious, covered, moveable
receptacles, constructed of galvanized iron or other non-absorbent
material, and removed from the premises without undue delay. Where hides
or skins are necessarily retained for a day or two before they can be
removed, they might without injury be advantageously brushed over on the
fleshy side with a solution of carbolic acid or some other antiseptic.
Fat should be freely exposed to the air in a cool place. As soon as the
slaughtering is completed the whole slaughter-house, floor and walls,
should be thoroughly washed. All the vessels and implements used in the
slaughtering should be kept clean and sweet. Deodorizers may sometimes
be used with advantage.”

There can be no doubt that whereas private slaughter-houses are
frequently a most injurious nuisance to the neighbourhood in which they
are placed, owing to their situation and construction, and a visit to
one of them is likely to give a strong impetus to vegetarianism, the
public abattoir, on however large a scale, if properly constructed and
managed, need be no nuisance whatever, and every town in the kingdom
should endeavour to obtain one, not only on account of the nuisance
caused by private slaughter-houses, but for the incentive which is given
to butchers to abstain from slaughtering diseased or unwholesome
animals, the prevention of cruelty, and the material benefits derived in
a proper establishment for the best methods of dressing the meat.

  [223] The word “abattoir” is a French word from “abattre” to fell, it
  is used in this country to designate a group of slaughter-houses.

  [224] The clauses referred to are contained in 10 & 11 Vic. c. 34, and
  are ss. 125, 126, et seq.; they refer to the registration, licensing
  and management of private slaughter-houses, and need not be commented
  upon here.

  [225] An ordinary beast is said to lose 3 cwt. in weight in a journey
  from Edinburgh to London.

  [226] The pole-axe should be of the American pattern, which has a head
  hollow and very sharp round the periphery. The practise is, after the
  blow is struck and the animal felled, to plunge a thin cane into the
  wound, which passes down the spine, causing instantaneous death whilst
  the animal is lying stunned.

  [227] The following is from the patent specification of this
  machinery:

  “Letters patent to John Meiklejon, of Westfield Iron Works, Dalkeith,
  in the County of Mid-Lothian, Scotland, for the invention of new or
  improved machinery and appliances to be used in hoisting, removing,
  dividing, and hanging on hooks, taking off these hooks again, and
  loading carcasses and other bodies in abattoirs, carcass and meat
  markets, and other places.”

  “The machinery and appliances above referred to enable the operations
  above named to be performed without the necessity of the butchers
  touching the meat. Also enables carcasses to be conveyed from
  abattoirs to carcass market on a travelling hoist (hereafter
  described), same being provided with rows of fixed jointed hooks or
  loops, attached to rails on which the hoist runs, so that the
  travelling hoist is enabled to hang the carcasses or bodies on to such
  hooks or loops. Also enables a butcher to hang a carcass on any of
  these hooks or loops, and pick them off again, and load on a vehicle,
  without moving or touching any of the other carcasses hanging on the
  other hooks. Also enables all operations to be performed, from
  hoisting when killed to loading when sold or removed from market.”

  [228] _Vide_ ‘Report on the New Cattle Market and Abattoirs proposed
  to be erected at Carolina Port, Dundee,’ by William Mackison, F.R.I.B.
  A., &c.




CHAPTER XXIX.

MARKETS.


Under certain conditions urban authorities are empowered to provide
markets in their district by the following clause of the Public Health
Act 1875:

“Where an urban authority are a local board or improvement
commissioners, they shall have power, with the consent of the owners and
ratepayers of their district, expressed by resolution passed in manner
provided by Schedule III. to this Act, and where the urban authority are
a town council they shall have power, with the consent of two thirds of
their number, to do the following things, or any of them, within their
district:

“To provide a market place, and construct a market house and other
conveniences, for the purpose of holding markets:

“To provide houses and places for weighing carts:

“To make convenient approaches to such market:

“To provide all such matters and things as may be necessary for the
convenient use of such market:

“To purchase or take on lease land, and public or private rights in
markets and tolls for any of the foregoing purposes:

“To take stallages, rents and tolls in respect of the use by any person
of such market:

“But no market shall be established in pursuance of this section so as
to interfere with any rights, powers, or privileges enjoyed within the
district by any person without his consent” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s.
166).

In many towns, markets both for cattle and general merchandise have been
already established, and the duties of the town surveyor are simply to
execute the necessary alterations and maintenance of the buildings in
connection with them, but there may be occasions on which he has to
advise his corporation upon the acquisition of land for the purpose of
laying it out as a cattle market, and afterwards the erection of the
necessary pens and buildings, and a few remarks upon the subject may be
of some service.

The site for a cattle market should be selected, if practicable, near to
a railway station, so as to avoid as much as possible the dangerous and
objectionable practice of driving cattle and sheep through the streets,
and for the same reasons it should be near the public slaughter-houses
if there are any in the town. Plenty of space should be provided in the
market for the cattle to move about in, for it must be remembered that
many of them which are sent to market are unused to the bustle of a
town, and are wild and untractable, and have never in their lives been
subjected to either penning or tethering.

The site must be easily and effectively drained, it should be somewhat
isolated with respect to neighbouring buildings, the more air that can
be got to sweep through it the better.

The accommodation necessary in a cattle market must vary considerably
with the requirements of the district, but the following list may be
given for selection:

(1.) Pens or lairs for fat beasts.

(2.) Pens or lairs for store cattle.

(3.) Pens or lairs for cows with calves.

(4.) Pens or lairs for calves.

(5.) Pens for sheep.

(6.) Pens or styes for pigs.

(7.) Covered sheds or stables for horses.

(8.) A space for showing horses off.

(9.) Sheds for agricultural implements.

(10.) Shops for the display of seeds, ropes, tarpaulins, sacks, etc.

(11.) Accommodation for auctioneers.

(12.) Lodges and offices for the superintendent or gate keeper.

(13.) A weighing machine and office.

(14.) A corn exchange (this is sometimes provided in the general
market).

The entrance to a cattle market may with advantage be provided with
double sets of gates, with a space between in which flocks of sheep or
herds of cattle can be temporarily penned; a wicket gate in the second
set of gates will enable the toll collecter to count the number of
animals easily as they pass through into the market.

The paving of the market should be of granite pitches, as it is
essential that it should not be slippery, or the cattle, which usually
arrive in a very excited condition, will fall and injure themselves;
this description of paving is also fairly impervious, and is easily
cleansed.

The paving of the lairs and pens may, however, be of asphalte.

For the cattle there may be enclosures for loose bullocks as well as
divisions in which the cattle are tethered; these divisions and
enclosures may be constructed of brick walls about 4 feet 6 inches in
height, or posts and rails of wood and iron, strongly fastened iron
rings about 4 feet apart are necessary to which the beasts must be
tethered.

The paving must be kept high towards the head of the beast in order to
show him off to the greatest advantage.

Large painted signboards should be fixed over the entrance of each
compartment, to designate to which class it belongs, in order to avoid
confusion or mistake. There should be drinking troughs for all cattle,
and hydrants should be fixed all about the market, so that it can be
thoroughly flushed and washed down.

The sheep-pens can be constructed with iron or wood posts and rails with
the whole of one side opening as a gate, they should be about 3 feet in
height, and the floor should slope up from the point at which the
purchaser will stand in order that the sheep at the far end of the pen
may not appear diminutive.[229]

The gates of the sheep-pens should be strongly stayed, as they make most
convenient seats on which the drovers and heavy farmers sit whilst they
drive their bargains.

With regard to the dimensions of the pens and lairs, the following sizes
are suggested as sufficient spaces for different animals, in the modern
bye-laws, emanating from the Local Government Board in 1877, with
respect to markets:

        For every horse             8 feet by 2 feet.
        For every ox or cow         8   „  „  2   „
        For every mule or ass       5   „  „  1 feet 6 inches.
        For every calf              5   „  „  1   „  3   „
  For every sheep, goat or pig (of medium size) 4 feet superficial.

The pens for calves and the styes for pigs should be covered, and their
floors should be about 3 feet 6 inches above the general level of the
market, as animals of this description are generally brought in carts,
and they could thus be easily moved out and in.

These pens and styes must of course be thoroughly well drained and
ventilated.

With regard to the weighing machine, this should be of the best
manufacture, and be of sufficient size to weigh a large wagon. It is
better to have what is called a “self contained” iron foundation, and
pit for the weighbridge rather than one of masonry. A convenient size
for this weighbridge would be 15 feet in length by 12 feet in breadth.

With reference to the rest of the provisions I have enumerated, they
require no special comment, but must necessarily be left to the
discretion of the town surveyor and the wishes of his corporation.

Markets for general merchandise are usually handsome buildings, which
are erected in the most central positions of the town; they contain:

(1.) The corn exchange (this is sometimes erected in the cattle market).

(2.) The fish market.

(3.) The dead meat market (this is sometimes erected in connection with
the public slaughter-houses).

(4.) The game and poultry market.

(5.) The fruit, vegetable and flower market.

(6.) The butter, eggs and cheese market.

(7.) The miscellaneous goods market.

(8.) Public conveniences.

(9.) Offices and dwelling for the clerk of the market.

(10.) Committee room for the market committee.

The floor of the market should be on a level as much as is practicable
with the adjacent streets; steps up or down are objectionable for the
public, and galleries or upper floors should also be avoided unless the
available area of the site is limited.

The interior of the building should be lofty, and it must be thoroughly
well ventilated; the great fault with nearly all existing markets is the
cutting draught to which buyers and sellers are usually subjected.

Plenty of light is essential, but the rays of the sun should be
excluded by frosted glass or other contrivance, or the goods exposed for
sale will be damaged.

The floor should be of asphalte or other similar material; it is
surprising what a “mess” is always made in a market.

The stalls must be so arranged as to show to best advantage the goods
offered, and plenty of “gangway” should be left between them for the
passage of the public.

Fish stalls should be constructed of iron, slate or similar material,
plenty of water being provided in this department; fish-washing troughs
filled with running water are very desirable, and a fountain can be
introduced with pleasing effect.

Butchers’ stalls should be of thick wood to resist the chopping, and
plenty of standards and rails provided with iron hooks must be fixed
above them.

A great number of moveable iron “offal boxes” should be placed in
different parts of the market, which must be cleared at least once a
day, and the market should be frequently flushed and cleansed with water
from hydrants fixed in different parts of the building.

Many other points will no doubt suggest themselves to town surveyors,
who have the important work of designing either cattle or general
markets to undertake, but the few suggestions which have been given may
be of some use.

  [229] The following is a description of the manner in which the sheep
  are penned in the cattle market of la Villette at Paris:--“The
  enclosures or pens are all of iron, those for the sheep have a centre
  railing 3 feet 3 inches high, and cross railings 1 foot 9 inches high;
  the former with three horizontal rails and vertical rods, and the
  latter two horizontal rails and vertical rods. There is a distance of
  15 feet betwixt the high railings, which is divided into three by iron
  posts 21 inches high. The first row of these posts is placed at a
  distance of 3 feet from the low cross railing at the passage, the
  second row 18 inches from the first, the third 3 feet from the second,
  and so on. The sheep are placed in line side by side as close as they
  can stand, with their heads up to the low rail. A moveable hurdle of
  wood is then set on edge between the sheep in rear and the iron posts
  just described. A passage of 18 inches is left clear, and then another
  row of sheep and another passage, and so on. In this manner a great
  number of sheep are put into little space, in such a way as all can be
  examined with the greatest ease.” (_Vide_ ‘Report on the New Cattle
  Market and Abattoirs proposed to be erected at Carolina Port, Dundee,’
  by W. Mackison, F.R.I.B.A., &c., Town Surveyor, Dundee).




CHAPTER XXX.

CEMETERIES.


Amongst the many duties that a town surveyor has to perform is sometimes
included that of laying out land for a large burial ground or cemetery,
and its management after construction. Power is given to all local
authorities to become burial authorities by the Public Health Interments
Act 1879, and so strongly is the need felt for what is called extramural
interment, that the Local Government Board may compel a local authority
to provide and maintain cemeteries. Power is also given for the
compulsory purchase of land for this purpose (see sections 175, 176, of
the Public Health Act 1875), and the cemetery may be placed either
within or without the district over which the local authority exercise
their jurisdiction, and many other privileges are granted in order to
encourage the acquisition of land so far removed from habitations as to
make the burial ground as sanitary as the practice of burying human
bodies can be made.

Land once consecrated or used for burial cannot afterwards be sold or
used for secular purposes, except of course by an Act of Parliament;
“footpaths may, however, be provided in a consecrated but disused burial
ground, and the ground may be planted, so as in effect, though not
nominally, to make it a public garden.”[230]

A cemetery must not be constructed within 200 yards of any dwelling
house, without the consent in writing of the owner, lessee, and occupier
of such house; but there is no prohibition upon anyone to prevent their
building a house close to a cemetery after it has been established.[231]

Chapels may be built in cemeteries for the performance of the burial
services, and the grounds may be laid out and embellished as the local
authority may deem fit. The cemetery must be enclosed by walls or other
sufficient fences or iron railings 8 feet in height; it must be properly
sewered and drained, but such drainage must not flow into any “stream,
canal, reservoir, aqueduct, pond or watering place.”[232]

Cemeteries are divided into consecrated and unconsecrated portions by
bond stones or other suitable marks; a chapel must be built upon the
consecrated portion, although it does not seem to be compulsory to do so
upon the unconsecrated portion.

The selection of a proper site on sanitary and other grounds for a
cemetery is one of the greatest importance, and a town surveyor, or
anyone who has this duty to perform, cannot do better than keep the
following words of the well-known sanitary engineer Mr. Eassie before
him:[233]

“A well-chosen cemetery is one whose soil is dry, close, and yet porous,
permitting the rain and its accompanying air to reach a reasonable
depth, and so expedite decay. The formation is also well covered with
vegetable mould, which assists in neutralising any hurtful emanations,
and encourages the growth of shrubs. The subsoil is also of such a kind
as to need no under draining, and such as will prevent the water lodging
in any grave or vault. It will also stand exposed to the north or north
east winds which are dry, and which do not hold the putrefactive gases
in solution, like the moist south or south westerly winds.”

“An improperly chosen graveyard may be said to be one where the soil is
dense and clayey, and impervious to moisture. It will be insufficiently
drained, necessitating the use of planks to walk upon in wet weather. It
will be too close to the abodes of the living, too small to permit
proper planting, the graves covered, it may be with flat stones which
prevent the passage downwards of the air and rain, and surrounded
moreover by high walls which exclude the fresh air. The ground will be
stony and insufficiently covered with vegetable soil. No natural outfall
will exist, and the drainage water must be pumped up, the bare idea of
which is horrible. It will be near also to water-bearing strata, or to a
reservoir. Long before decomposition has taken place owing to the
smallness of the site, and the impossibility of obtaining any more land
except at high building prices, the organic matter hidden out of sight
will be far too large in proportion to the area.”

Dr. Parsons, in a memorandum prepared by him on the “Sanitary
Requirements of Cemeteries” and published by the Local Government Board
in their eleventh annual report, says:

“The soil of a cemetery should be of an open, porous nature, with
numerous close interstices, through which air and moisture may pass in a
finely divided state freely in every direction. In such a soil decay
proceeds rapidly, and the products of decomposition are absorbed or
oxidised. The soil should be easily worked, yet not so loose as to
render the work of excavation dangerous through the liability to falls
of earth. It should be free from water or hard rock to a depth of at
least 8 feet. If not naturally free from water, it should be drained if
practicable to that depth: to this end it is necessary that the site
should be sufficiently elevated above the drainage level of the
locality, either naturally, or, where necessary, by filling it up to the
required level with suitable earth.”

“Loam, and sand with a sufficient quantity of vegetable mould, are the
best soils; clay and loose stones the worst. A dense clay is laborious
to work and difficult to drain; by excluding moisture and air it retards
decay, and it retains, in a concentrated state, the products of
decomposition, sometimes to be discharged into graves opened in the
vicinity, or sometimes to escape through cracks in the ground to the
surface. A loose, stony soil, on the other hand, allows the passage of
effluvia.”

And with reference to the site to be chosen for a cemetery he further
states:

“Nevertheless, in view of the evils which in former times have
undoubtedly arisen from the practice of intramural sepulture, and also
because the erection of houses near a cemetery interferes with the free
play of air around and over it, it is desirable that the site of the
cemetery should be in a neighbourhood in which building is not likely to
take place, and also that so far as practicable a belt of ground should
be reserved between the graves and the nearest land on which a house may
be built, in order to obviate to some extent the risk of contamination
of ground-air and subsoil water with decomposing matters. This is
especially necessary where houses are constructed with cellars. It is,
therefore, highly desirable that interments should not be made up to the
extreme edge of the cemetery, and it would be possible without great
waste of space to reserve in all cases a strip of ground free from
interments, 15 to 30 feet in width, around the whole cemetery on the
interior of the boundary fence. This strip would afford room, on the
inside for a gravel or asphalte walk to give access to all parts of the
cemetery, and on the outside next the fence to a belt of shrubs or
trees, the rootlets of which, penetrating the soil, would arrest and
assimilate any decomposing matters percolating to the exterior of the
cemetery. Obviously a cemetery should not be placed on elevated ground
above houses, where the soakings from it may percolate to the sites and
foundations of the dwellings below. . . .”

“Sites are of course unsuitable which are liable to be flooded or to
landslips, or which are in danger of being washed away, or encroached
upon by streams or the sea. Very steep sites are not desirable. The
cemetery should be accessible by good roads from all parts of the
district.”

As to the unsuitability of clay as a soil for cemeteries, Louis Créteur
in “Hygiene in the Battle Field” says, that the bodies of soldiers slain
during the Battle of Sedan were buried in chalk, quarry rubble, sand,
argillite, slate, marl, or clay soils, and the work of disinfection
lasted from the beginning of March till the end of June. In rubble the
decay had fully taken place, but in the clay the bodies kept well, and
even after a very long time the features could be identified.

With regard to the amount of land necessary for a cemetery, Dr. Parsons
calculates that about a quarter of an acre of land for every thousand of
the population of the community to whom the cemetery belongs, is the
“usually estimated minimum,” but this is far too small a proportion even
for a cemetery possessing every advantage, and he further states, “The
desirability of providing more than this bare minimum of space is
obvious, and is generally recognized.” It must be remembered that as a
rule, quite one-sixth of the total area of a cemetery is taken up by the
roads, paths, ornamental grass or beds of flowers and shrubs, the
chapels, mortuaries, lodges, &c., and sufficient width should be allowed
between each grave space to permit every grave being reached without
trampling on others: a standard of 110 burials per acre has sometimes
been taken, but this appears to me to be rather a small one.

In laying out ground for a cemetery, the following are some points that
require careful attention:

(1.) The position of the entrance or entrances; there should if possible
be only one, as a lodge is necessary at each, which entails expense.

(2.) The best position for the lodge or lodges, the chapels and
mortuary.

(3.) The direction of the roads in the cemetery: these must be wide
enough for the hearses and mourning coaches, and there must be
convenient places provided for turning round.

(4.) The direction of the paths:[234] these and the roads should be as
straight as possible, so as to economise available burial ground, paths
should be sufficiently wide to allow an entrance to be made in them to
the adjoining vaults or walled graves, these being frequently covered
with a massive tomb or ledger very difficult to remove. The vaults and
walled graves, being of a better class, are generally put in the borders
of the burial ground, close to the paths.

(5.) In some soils deep and careful drainage is necessary. This should
be carried out with ordinary drain pipes laid at a depth of at least 10
feet, and so communicating with each other and the grave spaces, that
even in a clay soil each grave as it is sunk should be found free from
water.

(6.) Surface drainage, especially of the roads and paths, is also
necessary.

(7.) Provision must be made for the disposal of the soil excavated from
the graves, as very little punning or ramming of the soil thrown in
after a burial should be permitted, and thus there is always a large
quantity of material to be otherwise disposed of.

The cemetery must be divided into Church or consecrated ground,
Dissenters’ ground, and Roman Catholic ground, in such proportions as
may be found to suit the particular requirements of the locality in
which the cemetery is placed.

These divisions must again be subdivided into sections according to the
class and description of the proposed grave, and each of these
subdivisions and grave-spaces must be accurately marked with a
distinguishing letter and number, so that on reference to a plan and a
register book, any person’s grave may be easily found, however long a
time may have elapsed since the interment took place, and although no
headstone or mark over the grave is there. It is needless to say, that
the plan of the cemetery has to be most carefully prepared, and the
ground equally carefully set out, to prevent any chance of error
occurring, or serious consequences might result. It may be well to
remark that no body can be removed after burial without an order from
one of Her Majesty’s principal Secretaries of State, or by faculty from
the Bishop in consecrated ground.[235]

The following description of the different sections necessary in a large
cemetery may here be of use, the fees chargeable for the privilege of
burying in each section advancing with the letters appropriated to the
sections.

_Section A._ This is appropriated to workhouse paupers or very poor
persons only,[236] the depth[237] of the grave may be limited to 6 feet,
and the size should be 9 feet by 4 feet; only coffins made of wood
should be allowed in this section.[238]

_Section B._ This is of a slightly superior class to the last, the
depth and size may however be the same, but a larger fee can be charged,
and the position of the section with reference to the paths should be
better and more convenient.

_Section C._ This is again superior to either of the former sections.
Extra depth and size may be allowed, and the position should also be
better.

_Section D._ In the previous sections only “common” graves as they are
called should be allowed. In this section either walled graves, vaults,
tombs or common graves may be placed, the common graves may be of extra
depth and size, the space for a vault may be 8 feet 6 inches by 6
feet.[239]

This section should be exclusively the borders of the paths and other
spots easily accessible and prominent to view.

_Section E._ This is the best section. No common graves should be
allowed in it, and the spaces allotted for burial may be isolated and of
various sizes according to agreement and payment. Here costly tombs and
monuments are erected, the position of the section being generally near
the chapels.[240]

In all the above sections it is necessary to provide for the burial of
children: these require smaller space and in some instances they can be
buried with their mother, but in separate coffins. Unfortunately it is
necessary to allow rather a large percentage of available space for the
interment of children, as the infant mortality in this country is so
excessive.

In connection with the question of the plan and the sections for
burial, it may be well to give the following rules and regulations for
the management of a cemetery:


_Cemetery Rules and Regulations._

(1.) All charges for interment, monuments, and gravestones must be paid
at the time the order is granted; no kind of work allowed to be done, or
any corpse brought on the ground without the production of an order.

(2.) Certificates of death to be produced (showing the name of the
parish, &c., and all other requisite information) on paying the fees.

(3.) Two days’ notice to be given for interment in graves, (exclusive of
Sunday,) and three days if a vault or brick grave be required. In
default, an extra charge will be made for working by night.

(4.) The time when the funeral procession will be on the ground to be
named in the notice. An extra fee of        will be charged when the
funeral procession is        minutes later than the time appointed, and
       for every        minutes afterwards.

(5.) The hours of interment are from      A.M. to      P.M. from
Michaelmas to Lady-day, and from      A.M. to      P.M. from Lady-day to
Michaelmas.

(6.) All brick or stone work in the graves, and all foundations and
fixing of memorials, or planting, shall be under the supervision and
control of the local authority or their appointed agent.

(7.) No grave or vault shall be re-opened by other persons than members
of that family without the written consent of the parties interested and
of the local authority. An extra fee for the interment of strangers will
be charged at the discretion of the local authority.

(8.) In all unbricked graves, coffins of wood only shall be used. No
interment will be allowed nearer the surface than four feet for an
adult, or three feet for a child under 12 years. Every coffin in a
bricked grave or vault to be separately entombed in an air-tight manner.

(9.) No palisades or iron railings to exceed      feet in height, except
with the special consent of the local authority; and no palisades, or
enclosure of any description will be permitted to a grave until a
headstone or tomb has been erected.

(10.) A drawing of every monument or gravestone to be submitted for
approval, and a copy of the intended inscription, if it contains more
than name, age, and date. Inscriptions to be arranged so as to face the
paths as far as practicable. Any question which shall arise touching the
fitness of any monumental inscription, placed in any part of the
consecrated portion of the ground, shall be determined on appeal by the
Bishop of the Diocese.

(11.) All graves and vaults, monuments, gravestones, fencing or other
enclosures, to be kept in repair by the persons interested in their
preservation. If suffered to go out of repair and become unsightly, the
local authority will remove them altogether, and they will not be
allowed to be replaced without the consent of the local authority.
Graves will be kept in order by the local authority for a fee of
per annum.

A plan of the ground, showing each grave space, is kept at the office of
the surveyor to the local authority and may be seen without charge.

The public are admitted to the cemetery, on weekdays, from 7 A.M. to 8
P.M. from Lady-day to Michaelmas, and from 8 A.M. to 5 P.M. from
Michaelmas to Lady-day. On Sundays, from 2 to 8 P.M. in summer and 2 to
5 P.M. in winter.

All further information may be obtained at the office.

The local authority forbid any gratuity being received by their
servants.

The local authority reserves a right, from time to time, to make any
alteration in the foregoing charges and regulations.

In connection with the above rules, a scale of fees of the charges for
interments must be prepared as well as for headstones, foot-stones,
ledgers, and tombs, or for enclosing any grave with kerbing,
iron-railings, posts and chains, &c.

The practice of allowing persons to plant small shrubs and trees upon
the graves of their friends, should be deprecated, as not only do they
tend eventually to make a cemetery look untidy but they are placed so
close to the graves that when they grow up their roots often split open
a vault or walled grave, and even damage valuable tombstones.

Trees which are suitable for cemeteries, and which would thrive even in
a town atmosphere, are the weeping willow, cypress, yew, cedar, juniper,
birch, ash, weeping elm, and a considerable number and variety of
drooping and other deciduous trees. These should, however, be planted
under the control of the local authority, as otherwise a cemetery would
soon be overrun by them.

The regulations issued by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
in January 1863, for burial grounds provided under the Burial Acts, may
be of use for reference, and are given _in extenso_:

(1.) The burial ground shall be effectually fenced, and, if necessary,
under-drained to such a depth as will prevent water remaining in any
grave or vault.

(2.) The area to be used for graves shall be divided into grave spaces,
to be designated by convenient marks, so that the position of each may
be readily determined, and a corresponding plan kept on which each grave
space shall be shown.

(3.) The grave spaces for the burial of persons above 12 years of age
shall be at least 9 feet by 4 feet, and those for the burial of children
under 12 years of age, 6 feet by 3 feet, or if preferred, half the
measurement of the adult grave space, namely, 4¹⁄₂ feet by 4 feet.

(4.) A register of graves shall be kept in which the name, age, and date
of burial in each shall be duly registered.

(5.) No body shall be buried in any vault or walled grave unless the
coffin be separately entombed in an air-tight manner; that is, by
properly cemented stone or brickwork, which shall never be disturbed.

(6.) One body only shall be buried in a grave at one time, unless the
bodies be those of members of the same family.

(7.) No unwalled grave shall be re-opened within 14 years after the
burial of a person above 12 years of age, or within eight years after
the burial of a child under 12 years of age, unless to bury another
member of the same family, in which case a layer of earth not less than
1 foot thick shall be left undisturbed above the previously buried
coffin; but if on reopening any grave the soil be found to be offensive,
such soil shall not be disturbed, and in no case shall human remains be
removed from the grave.

(8.) No coffin shall be buried in any unwalled grave within 4 feet of
the ordinary level of the ground, unless it contains the body of a child
under 12 years of age, when it shall not be less than 3 feet below that
level.

For further information upon the subject of the Interments Act 1879 and
much useful information in connection with cemeteries, I refer my
readers to ‘Notes and Practical Suggestions upon the Interment Act
1875,’ by T. Baker, Esq.

I cannot close this chapter upon cemeteries without a few words upon a
subject which is analogous, cremation; and although I am aware that this
is a debateable question, still it is impossible for me to be silent, as
from my official experience on the practice of burial, I am so deeply
convinced that cremation should be substituted for it for very many
weighty reasons, that I feel it is necessary for me to give them.

They are as follows:

(1.) Nothing can be more unsanitary or dangerous to the living than the
burial of the dead. This has been enlarged upon over and over again by
men who have well studied the subject and are competent to give an
opinion and to that opinion I add my testimony.

(2.) Nothing can be more loathsome and degrading to the dead bodies of
our friends or more revolting to our feelings, than the horrible
practice of placing the remains of those we love in the soil of a common
churchyard or cemetery, to be devoured with other bodies by worms.

(3.) In placing a dead body under ground we can never be sure how long
the remains will be left undisturbed, a new street or railway will soon
destroy all traces of its resting place,[241] and even the law only
allows a grave to remain undisturbed for a short 14 years.

(4.) In the event of friends or relations dying abroad their remains
cannot be sent home for burial except at great expense, cremation would
reduce the body to a few beautiful silvery ashes which could easily be
brought home and secured on arrival in a suitable and safe
position.[242]

(5.) Cremation is the most respectful and beautiful manner for the
disposal of dead bodies, and need not alarm (on religious grounds[243])
any more than the practice at sea of lowering the dead bodies overboard
to be eventually eaten and digested by marine animals.

(7.) Cremation would settle at once and for ever the vexed question of
burial in consecrated or unconsecrated ground, and all the unseemly
quarrels which have taken place in connection with it from time to
time.

(8.) The great extent of land that is now wasted in public burial
grounds and cemeteries.[244]

There is no reason, even if cremation should take the place of burial,
why the fees for clergymen and others should not remain as at present,
and the unpleasant assistance of the British-ghoul, the undertaker, with
his long face at the ceremony and still longer bill afterwards, could
easily be dispensed with.

The opponents of cremation urge that it would be more expensive than
burial, and consequently out of the reach of the poorer classes, and
also that it would cause so much difficulty in detecting cases of
poisoning, that it would tend to encourage persons to poison others who
happened to be in their way, or objectionable to them, and thus crime
would go unchecked.

If these are the only objections they are easily to be overcome.

First, by constructing public crematories, where for a few shillings a
day sufficient heat could be maintained to consume almost any number of
bodies, whilst the present great expense of maintaining large cemeteries
with their attendant guardians and other costs would be dispensed with;
and

Secondly, by instituting a scientific and independent enquiry as to the
cause of every death which occurs. This is so much required at the
present day for the sake of the public health, that even if cremation is
never introduced it should be at once enforced, so that those who have
charge of the public health could have exact and reliable knowledge of
the causes of all the deaths throughout the United Kingdom, and thus
obtain such valuable information as would greatly assist in the daily
fight to subdue and overcome deaths from preventable causes.

  [230] _Vide_ ‘Fitzgerald’s Public Health Act,’ p. 130, 3rd edition.

  [231] _Vide_ ‘Fitzgerald’s Public Health Act,’ p. 131, 3rd edition.
  Foot note to clause x. Cemetery Clauses Act 1847.

  [232] Cemetery Clauses Act 1847, s. 20.

  [233] _Vide_ ‘Cremation of the Dead,’ by William Eassie, C.E. &c. &c.,
  p. 50.

  [234] The roads and paths in a cemetery require to be carefully made,
  in order that they may be available during any weather.

  [235] 20 & 21 Vic. c. 81, s. 25.

  [236] The following is a description of the manner of burying the
  poorer people in the cemetery of Pere la Chaise, near Paris. (_Vide_
  ‘The Parks, Promenades, and Gardens of Paris,’ by W. Robinson, F.L.S.,
  &c., p. 109.) “A very wide trench or fosse is cut wide enough to hold
  two rows of coffins placed across it, and 100 yards long or so. Here
  they are rapidly stowed in one after another, just as nursery
  labourers lay in stock ‘by the heels,’ only much closer, because there
  is no earth between the coffins, and wherever the coffins, which are
  very like egg-boxes, only somewhat less substantial, happen to be
  short so that a little space is left between the two rows, those of
  children are placed in lengthwise between them to economise space; the
  whole being done exactly as a natty man would pack together turves or
  mushroom spawn bricks.”. . . Let us hope that whatever else may be
  “taken from the French,” we may never imitate them in their cemetery
  management.

  [237] Depth of burial varies from 6 to 10 feet, but there must be 4
  feet of earth upon the top of the last coffin if an adult, 3 feet if a
  child.

  [238] A proper grave should be dry when opened, and have a sufficiency
  of soil over the coffin to absorb any gases of decomposition; it
  should allow an adjoining grave to be opened without collapsing, and
  should if possible dispense with the necessity of shoring or close
  timbering the sides, and should allow sufficient space for a headstone
  to be placed over it.

  [239] In a tomb or walled grave, the coffin should be enclosed in an
  air-tight case, by means of a stone cemented down which must never
  again be moved; or concrete may be used. It is a good plan to put some
  charcoal with the coffin to absorb any gases of decomposition in case
  of the vault opening accidentally at any future time, and in order to
  guard against such an occurrence it is better to leave at least 2 feet
  of earth on the top of the grave below the surface of the ground in
  walled graves.

  [240] “No body shall be buried in any vault under any chapel of the
  cemetery or within 15 feet of the outer wall of any such chapel.”
  (_Vide_ s. 39, Cemetery Clauses Act 1847.)

  [241] In a beautiful out-of-the-way valley in Wales, there is a pretty
  village with a quiet churchyard far from the “busy haunts of man,” yet
  here it is found necessary to disinter all the bodies, as this
  churchyard will soon be 30 feet under the surface of the water of an
  immense reservoir now being constructed to supply the living with
  drinking water, and it would not be right to leave the bodies there.

  [242] The body of Lord Balcarres was (as is now history) removed from
  the mausoleum in his own grounds, and only recovered after a most
  painful interval; this desecration could not have happened had his
  body been cremated and the ashes suitably secured.

  [243] I believe it was Lord Shaftesbury whose remark on this point
  was, “What would have become of the blessed martyrs, if destruction by
  fire was to annul their chances of resurrection?”

  [244] The metropolis alone has in addition to the numerous burying
  grounds near its parish churches, &c. (many of which have been,
  however, dug up and destroyed), the average of which it would be
  difficult to determine, the following cemeteries, which may be called
  extra mural:

  Woking Cemetery                   500 acres
  Ilford and Leytonstone Cemetery   168  „
  Norwood and Nunhead Cemetery       40  „
  Highgate Cemetery                  40  „
  West London at Brompton            40  „
  Abney Park Cemetery                32  „
  Kensal Green Cemetery              18  „
  Victoria Cemetery                  ----
  Tower Hamlets Cemetery             ----
  Colney Hatch Cemetery              ----




CHAPTER XXXI.

MORTUARIES.


As the Public Health Act 1875 contains several clauses bearing upon
mortuaries, a few words upon this subject will not be altogether
inappropriate.

The great and terrible evils arising from the practice of keeping
corpses in inhabited rooms by the poorer classes were pointed out by Mr.
Chadwick in the year 1843[245] and the following clauses upon this
subject and the necessity imposed upon the local authority to provide
proper mortuaries are contained in the Public Health Act 1875:

“Any local authority may, and if required by the Local Government Board
shall provide and fit up a proper place for the reception of dead bodies
before interment (in this Act called a mortuary), and may make bye-laws
with respect to the management and charges for use of the same; they may
also provide for the decent and economical interment, at charges to be
fixed by such bye-laws, of any dead body which may be received into a
mortuary (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 141).

“Where the body of one who has died of any infectious disease is
retained in a room in which persons live or sleep, or any dead body
which is in such a state as to endanger the health of the inmates of the
same house or room is retained in such house or room, any justice may,
on a certificate signed by a legally qualified medical practitioner,
order the body to be removed, at the cost of the local authority, to any
mortuary provided by such authority, and direct the same to be buried
within a time to be limited in such order; and unless the friends or
relations of the deceased undertake to bury the body within the time so
limited, and do bury the same, it shall be the duty of the relieving
officer to bury such body at the expense of the poor rate, but any
expense so incurred may be recovered by the relieving officer in a
summary manner from any person legally liable to pay the expense of such
burial.

“Any person obstructing the execution of an order made by a justice
under this section shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five
pounds” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 142).

From these clauses it would appear that a mortuary or mortuaries are an
absolute essential in every town, although it does not appear necessary
to have a separate mortuary for any “body of one who has died of any
infectious disease,” but it may be taken to the mortuary which has been
provided for the reception of dead bodies generally. It may also be
assumed that bodies may be viewed by a coroner’s jury in the mortuary,
although a post-mortem examination cannot be made in it, as by the
following section:

“Any local authority may provide and maintain a proper place (otherwise
than at a workhouse or at a mortuary) for the reception of dead bodies
during the time required to conduct any post-mortem examination ordered
by a coroner or other constituted authority, and may make regulations
with respect to the management of such place; and where any such place
has been provided, a coroner or other constituted authority may order
the removal of the body to and from such place for carrying out such
post-mortem examination, such costs of removal to be paid in the same
manner and out of the same fund as the costs and fees for post-mortem
examinations when ordered by the coroner (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 143).”

It will be observed that the above clause apparently forbids a
post-mortem room being provided at the mortuary, although this would
appear to be the most appropriate situation for it, and indeed such a
room is frequently provided at or near the mortuary. The reason for this
prohibition, especially as it is associated with a workhouse, is
evidently to overcome the prejudice which would exist in the minds of
the ignorant that the fact of taking a body to a mortuary necessitated
dissection: a practice which is looked upon with much disfavour by such
persons.

Mortuaries in this country generally consist of one of the following
descriptions:

(1.) Elaborate groups of buildings, comprising mortuary chapel,
coroner’s room, post-mortem room, dead house, waiting rooms, &c., and
the necessary care-taker’s rooms, and offices.

(2.) Mortuaries in connection with infectious hospitals.

(3.) Mortuaries in connection with general hospitals.

(4.) Mortuaries at cemeteries or licensed burial grounds.

(5.) Dead-houses provided by the sanitary authority.

In arranging for the erection of a dead-house or mortuary in any town,
the surveyor may find the following particulars and suggestions of some
use to him:

A mortuary must be provided in the grounds or near all cemeteries that
are in active operation, but in addition to these, others ought to be
erected in central positions of the town, so that bodies can be easily
conveyed there, not only with a view to meet the objections mentioned in
the opening of this chapter, but also to avoid the unseemly practice at
present so largely in vogue of taking any cases of sudden death,
suicide, accidental drowning, violence or accident, &c., that may occur,
to the nearest public house, there to await identification and the
coroner’s inquest.[246]

It has been computed that for every 50,000 of the population of any
town, a mortuary should be provided.

In Frankfort mortuaries have been for some years in existence; they are
simple buildings, with a separate room for each corpse, intended not
only to prevent bodies from being kept in private houses, but also to
lessen the chance of any person being buried alive. The following is a
plan of one of these institutions:

[Illustration: PLAN OF A GERMAN LEICHENHAUS OR DEAD-HOUSE.]

To prevent the chance of burying any person alive, each corpse as it is
placed in its little dead-house has a ring placed upon its finger; this
ring is attached to a string which is in communication with a bell which
hangs in the attendant’s room, who is there night and day, a window
communicates with each dead-house, so that on the alarm being given he
is at once ready to render assistance.

In Paris, as is well known, all bodies that are found are placed in the
“Morgue” behind “Notre Dame,” where they are publicly exhibited, thus
assisting identification, although the exposure of bodies in this
manner is not very attractive.

In preparing designs for a group of buildings such as are set forth in
the first on the list which I have given, the following requirements
should be considered:

_The Mortuary Chapel_ should be of such dimensions as are suitable for
the requirements of the district, bearing in mind that if an epidemic of
a fatal character was to unfortunately break out, it could either
provide accommodation for the extra strain upon it or be capable of
being easily extended. It should be designed so as to combine the
characteristics of a chapel with the most perfect sanitary
arrangements.[247] The walls should be of stone and are better lined
with cement or glazed tiles, and everything should be kept as flush as
possible so as to avoid projections on which dust could accumulate, the
whole being easily and readily cleansed and disinfected. The floor may
be of asphalte or other impervious material, and be well drained, great
care being of course taken to exclude rats.

The ventilation must be perfect, the building should always be of low
temperature even in the hottest days of summer. All the group of
buildings should, if possible, be surrounded by a free belt of air.
Their position should be isolated with respect to other buildings, and
of course it is highly necessary that they should be as far away as
possible from any dwelling-houses, a disused burial ground being
sometimes selected as a convenient site. The furniture of a mortuary
chapel should consist only of trestles or of brackets against the walls
upon which to rest the shells containing the corpses.

_The Dead-house_ should be a room smaller than the mortuary chapel, but
its construction may be the same. It is here that all bodies should be
brought uncoffined for the purpose of awaiting identification, or
preparatory to post-mortem examination, or of bodies of those who have
died from dangerous contagious maladies, and rendering immediate removal
necessary; these are placed upon slabs provided for the purpose, which
may be of slate, zinc, or other suitable material. In conjunction with
the dead-house should be

_The Post-Mortem Room_, which requires plenty of light; it must also,
like the mortuary chapel and dead-house, be thoroughly ventilated and
drained and be easily cleansed. Its furniture must consist of the
necessary post-mortem table of slate, zinc, or wood covered entirely
with lead: this table must slightly dish towards the centre and be
drained into a pail or on to a grating. Plenty of water is essential,
conveniently laid on, and the room must be fitted with good arrangements
for gas or other means of artificial lighting. Some method is also
necessary for the purpose of heating water whenever it is required.

_The Coroner’s Court_ may be simply a large room with convenient
seatings and tables for the coroner and his jury, accommodation being
also provided for the press, witnesses, &c. with the necessary retiring
rooms and offices.

In addition to the above requirements the following accommodation should
also be provided:

_A caretaker_ or _resident attendant_ should have accommodation at or
near the main group of buildings.

_A Laboratory and Weighing Room_ should also be provided in connection
with the post-mortem room; and a _Store Room_ for spare shells and
disinfectants, &c.

If possible also it is well to provide a _Hearse House_; and in
connection with the mortuary establishment, the disinfecting of bedding,
clothing, &c., which have become infected, should also if possible be
carried on.

Before, however, proceeding to discuss the question of disinfection I
will give the following drawing of a mortuary chapel, &c., as proposed
by the late Dr. W. Hardwicke, the well-known Coroner, in a valuable
paper upon the subject of Public Mortuaries which he read before the
Royal Institute of British Architects in the year 1869:

[Illustration]

I am, however, not aware that any public mortuary even of this size has
yet been actually carried out in this country, greatly as they are
needed.

With reference to the question of disinfection, which as I stated can be
conveniently taken in connection with that of mortuaries, the following
is the clause of the Public Health Act 1875 which deals with it:

“Any local authority may provide a proper place, with all necessary
apparatus and attendance, for the disinfection of bedding, clothing or
other articles which have become infected, and may cause any articles
brought for disinfection to be disinfected free of charge (38 & 39 Vic.
c. 55, s. 122). See also 38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, ss. 120 and 121.”

The first duty here involved is to provide a proper place for this
purpose, and this place cannot be better than that of the mortuary, so
as to centralize as much as possible the spots to which infection has to
be carried, and the necessary attendant can also here be found, as well
as convenient places to put the hand carts, &c., presently described.

The next duty is to provide the necessary apparatus, which is now done
almost exclusively by the action of heat. This is sometimes effected by
building brick-work chambers which can be heated up to about 350° Fahr.
after the doors are closed, by means of coal or coke furnaces. Within
these chambers are moveable horses on which are placed the articles to
be disinfected: these are exposed to the necessary heat for varying
times according to the nature of the articles, the horse is then drawn
out, when the articles should be thoroughly washed with a disinfecting
soap and returned to their owners. Great care is necessary in this
operation to ensure evenness of heat, as otherwise the clothes, bedding,
&c., may be scorched and injured, and the local authority will then have
to make compensation.

A more convenient form of disinfecting machine, and one that is less
costly to work and more even in its temperature, is one that can be
heated by gas, this is sometimes effected by the use of an iron box with
counter-balanced lid into which the articles are put, heat being applied
by means of gas jets burning underneath. A more elaborate and effective
method has however been patented, and is now manufactured by Messrs.
Goddard and Massey of Nottingham, which is known as Dr. Ranson’s system.
The following drawing shows the arrangement of this machine, and some of
the advantages claimed for it are as follows:

Its heat is maintained automatically within certain limits in all parts
of the chamber, and has great drying power, which is important, as
securing from the long period of time at which this steady heat can be
maintained, that penetration into bedding and other bad conductors which
is so desirable to secure the necessary destruction of all disease germs
or chances of after inoculation:

[Illustration]

There can be no doubt that where a machine is not required to be
constantly at work gas is the cheapest and most convenient heat-producer
that we have.

It is of course necessary that the infected bedding and clothing should
be fetched from the owners’ houses in such a manner as will lessen the
risk of spreading infection as much as possible, and for this purpose it
is necessary for the local authority to keep a covered hand-cart which
should be lined with tin and closed hermetically. It should be
sufficiently large to take a mattrass, and be of light construction, so
that one man can draw it when full.

Before concluding my remarks on disinfection, it is well to state that
plenty of carbolic acid should be kept in a mortuary. Sheets saturated
with carbolic acid are used to wrap around the dead bodies of infected
persons, and sawdust saturated with carbolic acid is also freely used,
besides large quantities of that excellent disinfectant, “Sanitas.”

  [245] _Vide_ ‘A Supplementary Report on the Results of a Special
  Enquiry into the Practice of Interments in Towns,’ by Edwin Chadwick,
  1843.

  [246] There is no law that can compel any one to receive a dead body
  into his house.

  [247] It is important to remove the idea of a “parish dead-house,”
  otherwise its object will be defeated, as persons will object to allow
  the bodies of their deceased friends to be taken to it.




CHAPTER XXXII.

BORROWING UNDER THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD.


There are a number of clauses in the Public Health Act 1875, which
empower a local authority to borrow money on the credit of the rates for
the purpose of “defraying any costs, charges and expenses incurred or to
be incurred by them in the execution of the Sanitary Acts.” (_Vide_ 38 &
39 Vic. c. 55, s. 233).

The exercise of these powers of borrowing are subject to the following
regulations:

(1.) Money shall not be borrowed except for permanent works.[248]

(2.) The sum borrowed shall not exceed at any time, including all
outstanding debts, the assessable value for two years of the district.

(3.) Where it exceeds the value of one year, the Local Government Board
will not give their sanction until one of their inspectors has held a
local enquiry.

(4.) The money cannot be borrowed for a longer time than 60 years, and
it must be paid off within that time.

(5.) Certain regulations as to sinking funds, &c. (_Vide_ 38 & 39 Vic.
c. 55, s. 234 _et seq._)

The power to borrow money thus granted to local authorities has
undoubtedly given a considerable stimulus to the execution of important
sanitary works which could not be carried out if they had to be paid for
out of the current rates. It is also a fair and equitable arrangement
that permanent works should be paid for by those that reap the benefit
of them, and it is now so arranged that the money borrowed is repaid
within a certain specified time by equal annual payments, in order that
the ratepayer of the present shall not be unduly taxed for the benefit
of posterity.

No regular or fixed times have been settled by the Local Government
Board over which they will allow the repayment of loans to be spread,
but it appears that the duration of the proposed works somewhat guides
the length of time allowed, as will appear from the following list which
I have prepared from the eighth Annual Report of the Local Government
Board:

  Description of Work.                  Number of Years.

  Purchase of land                          50  to 60
  Sewage disposal                           30  „  50
  Sewerage works                            30  „  50
  Water supply                              20  „  50
  Fire brigade purposes                     30 and 60
  Market Purposes                           30  „  60
  Plan of district                          20  „  30
  Lamps for public lighting                 10  „  20
  Artizans and Labourers’ Dwellings Act     50
  Erection of hospital                      30
     „     „  public baths                  30
     „     „  slaughter-houses              30
     „     „  buildings at sewage farm      30
  A public park                             50
  Cemeteries                                30
  Gas supply                                30
  Street improvements                       15  to 30
  Paving[249] and channelling               15  „  20
  Stables, urinals, enginehouse             20
  Construction of a new road                20
  Disinfecting apparatus                    20
  Mortuary and weighing machine             15
  Steam road roller                         10

Whenever a local authority decide to make application to the Local
Government Board for power to borrow money for any proposed improvements
or works within their district, it is the duty of the town surveyor to
prepare the necessary drawings and obtain the required information in
order to fill in the forms which are supplied from the Local Government
Board office.

With reference to this important part of his duty, I cannot do better
than give the following Suggestions as to the Preparation of Plans of
Proposed Works, by Robert Rawlinson, C.B., C.E., &c. (Chief Engineering
Inspector to the Local Government Board), prepared by him in 1878:

“It will in all cases be necessary, upon application being made for
sanction to a loan, for the execution of works, that plans (or tracings
of the plans), sections, estimates in detail and specifications be
submitted with the application, accompanied by information as to the
population at the two last periods of the taking of the census, the
rateable value of the district, and the amount of outstanding loans.”

“Such plans or tracings may be used for showing lines of main sewers,
drains, water-pipes and gas-mains. The lines of main sewers and drains
should have the cross sectional dimensions of the sewers and their
gradients distinctly marked (written and figured) upon them. The
dimensions of water and gas pipes should also be shown in figures or by
writing.”

“N.B.--No general map should be submitted which is drawn to a scale of
less than 6 inches to a mile, except when the inch ordnance map is
used.”

“Maps upon which sewerage works or water works are to be shown, or for
street improvements, should be not less than the ordnance scale of
¹⁄₂₅₀₀th.”

“The sections should be drawn to the same horizontal scale, and to a
vertical scale of 20 feet to 1 inch.”

Any detailed plan for the purposes of house drainage, paving, the
purchase of land &c., should be “constructed to a scale of not less than
10 feet to a mile, and upon this plan should be exhibited all houses and
other buildings, bench marks, the levels of streets and roads, of
cellars, of the sea at high and low tide level, and the summer and
flood levels of rivers. 3 feet by 2 feet will be a convenient size for
the sheets of this plan.”

“Enlarged detail plans and sections of sewers, side entrances,
man-holes, sewer sluices, sluice valves, water-pipe joints, and similar
details, should be to a scale not less than 8 feet to 1 inch, and for
some details 4 feet to 1 inch.”[250]

“As it may occasionally be desired to carry out works piecemeal, with a
view to save the time which would be occupied in the preparation of a
complete plan from actual survey, it will be sufficient in the first
instance to furnish any available general plan of streets and roads,
with the surface levels and those of the deepest cellars figured in feet
and inches, and the proposed scheme of works shown (or sketched)
thereon, after which the works can proceed in sections. It should be
understood, however, that a complete plan of the entire district must be
proceeded with, so that when the works are finished, the sanitary
authority and this Board may possess a proper record of them.”

And again, Mr. Rawlinson in the same year, at a meeting of the
Association of Municipal and Sanitary Engineers, writes as follows:

“Plans should be neatly and clearly drawn, the cross sectional
dimensions and the gradient being written on the _plan_ of sewers; there
should be a title and scale on each plan, as also on each sheet, and the
date with the name of the engineer or surveyor clearly written so as
easily to be read; this as a rule should be in the right-hand corner.
Many names are so written that experts cannot read them, and plans are
frequently sent out having no title, nor any scale, nor any name.”

“Plans of details, such as side entrances, man-holes, flushing chambers,
and sewer ventilating arrangements, should be at 4 feet to an inch,
larger works may be at 4, 10 to 20 feet to an inch. Clear understandable
and measurable details are desirable . . . I have much trouble in
looking over defectively prepared plans and crude ill-understood and
ill-digested schemes as they are submitted to the Local Government
Board, for approval and sanction to a proposed loan. One great fact
connected with the Board must not, however, be overlooked. It is not an
office of works, it does not undertake to devise neither does it make
itself responsible in any degree for the plans or for the estimates
which may have been sanctioned. Each engineer and each local authority
must both devise and execute the local works, and the district must
alone be responsible for the local expenditure. The Board neither
dictates as to works, nor superintends works, but reserves the power of
refusing sanction to a proposed loan, and of requiring full explanations
as to failures in the works, or as to expenses over estimates before
sanctioning a supplemental loan. The reason that the Board declines
responsibility ought to be clearly manifest; plans and details may be
the best possible, but the ultimate result depends on daily local
supervision, and this the Board does not give; neither local action nor
local responsibility is superseded.”

Speaking on this point at the first meeting of the Sanitary Institute of
Great Britain held at Croydon in 1879, Captain Douglas Galton, C.B.,
says:[251]

“Where a loan is applied for, the plan upon which the money is to be
spent is submitted for Government approval. The Government only lends
the money after the approval of the proposed scheme of expenditure by
one of their inspectors.”

“The Local Authorities of the towns to be drained cannot therefore be
responsible for the plan selected, for the Local Authorities must alter
their plans to suit the views of the inspector. The responsibility of
the engineer is diminished, because he may be compelled to modify his
plan in a manner in which he may not thoroughly approve, and the
inspector has no responsibility in the matter, because, after having
approved of the general scheme, he has no control over the details or
the execution of the work, nor can he be in any way held responsible, if
the result were a failure.”

  [248] The Local Government Board have held a steam roller, a steam
  fire-engine, a disinfecting apparatus, and lamp columns to be
  permanent works.

  [249] For asphalte pavements twelve years have been allowed.

  [250] “Details may be drawn to any scale larger than the dimensions
  named. Engraved or lithographed diagrams, if clear and distinct, will
  be accepted. A new plan of any town or district cannot be used for
  main sewering, water supply, gas supply, pavements, footwalks, and
  other purposes without spoiling it; consequently it had better be
  retained as a standard and be zincographed, there may then be copies
  for all local purposes. The zinc plates to be the property of the
  local authority.”

  [251] _Vide_ ‘Transactions of the Sanitary Institute of Great
  Britain,’ vol. i. p. 116.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

CONTRACTS.


Contracts being principally a legal question, it is not my intention to
say much on the matter.

In the Public Health Act 1875 will be found the following clauses:

“Any Local Authority may enter into any contracts necessary for carrying
this Act into execution (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 173).

“With respect to contracts made by an Urban Authority under this Act,
the following regulations shall be observed (namely):

“(1.) Every contract made by an Urban Authority whereof the value or
amount exceeds fifty pounds shall be in writing, and sealed with the
common seal of such authority:

“(2.) Every such contract shall specify the work, materials, matters or
things to be furnished, had or done, the price to be paid, and the time
or times within which the contract is to be performed, and shall specify
some pecuniary penalty to be paid in case the terms of the contract are
not duly performed:

“(3.) Before contracting for the execution of any works under the
provisions of this Act, an Urban Authority shall obtain from their
surveyor an estimate in writing, as well of the probable expense of
executing the work in a substantial manner as of the annual expense of
repairing the same; also a report as to the most advantageous mode of
contracting, that is to say, whether by contracting only for the
execution of the work, or for executing and also maintaining the same in
repair during a term of years or otherwise:

“(4.) Before any contract of the value or amount of one hundred pounds
or upwards is entered into by an Urban Authority ten days’ public notice
at the least shall be given, expressing the nature and purpose thereof,
and inviting tenders for the execution of the same; and such authority
shall require and take sufficient security for the due performance of
the same:

“(5.) Every contract entered into by an Urban Authority in conformity
with the provisions of this section, and duly executed by the other
parties thereto, shall be binding on the Authority by whom the same is
executed and their successors, and on all other parties thereto and
their executors, administrators, successors or assigns to all intents
and purposes: Provided that an Urban Authority may compound with any
contractor or other person in respect of any penalty incurred by reason
of the non-performance of any contract entered into as aforesaid,
whether such penalty is mentioned in any such contract, or in any bond
or otherwise, for such sums of money or other recompense as to such
Authority may seem proper” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 174).

In reading the numerous foot-notes that follow the above clauses in
Glen’s ‘Law of Public Health and Local Government,’ it will be seen that
contracts with corporations have been held to be very different from
ordinary ones between individuals or companies. All contracts should be
by deed under the seal of the corporation, or “there is no safety or
security for anyone dealing with such a body on any other footing,” and
this applies also in “respect of any variation or alteration in a
contract which has been made.”

“A committee of the corporation has no power to enter into any contract”
(38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 200).

A member of a corporation may not be “concerned in any bargain or
contract” entered into by the corporation, although this would not
vitiate the contract (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, sch. 11, clause 64), neither
may an officer of the corporation be “concerned or interested in any
bargain or contract” (38 & 39 Vic. c. 55, s. 193).

It is, of course, necessary before any contract can be entered into,
that the town surveyor should prepare the specification, schedule of
prices and drawings where necessary; this entails a considerable amount
of work.

In addition to ordinary specifications for works, the town surveyor has
often to prepare specifications and schedules for the supply of the
following goods:

  Ironmongery.
  Paints, etc.
  Disinfectants.
  Castings.
  Coals.
  Harness.
  Fodder.
  Road metal.
  Paving.
  Clothing.
  Stationery.
  Horse hire.

and a host of other things too numerous to mention.

A well-written, clear, and comprehensive specification is a most
difficult thing to write, but it should be “common sense” from beginning
to end, any legal phraseology being left to the town clerk to introduce
in his “deed” as required by the Act.

For sewer and drain work lump sum contracts are often undesirable: it is
better to work according to a schedule of prices, and periodical
measurements.

It must not be forgotten that in all contracts the contractor seeks to
make a profit out of the work; if there is no intermediate contractor
this profit goes to the ratepayers. In most sanitary works also the men
employed by the local authority are more skilled in that particular
class of work than the chance men employed by a contractor, and for this
and many other reasons, administration by the local authority is in most
cases preferable to contracts.[252]

Where tenders have been invited by advertisement or otherwise, the
successful person should be written to, apprising him of the fact, and
requesting him to call, sign the necessary specification, deeds, and
drawings; an intimation should also be made to the unsuccessful
competitors that their tenders have not been accepted.

In conclusion, let me thank the authors of the following books for the
useful information which I have gained in perusing them for the purposes
of this work, and, let me add, they can be studied with advantage by
every “Town Surveyor”:

  ‘American Sanitary Engineering,’ by E. S. Philbrick.

  ‘Annales des Ponts et Chaussées,’ published in Paris.

  ‘Annual Reports of the Local Government Board,’ published in London.

  ‘A Practical Guide for Inspectors of Nuisances,’ by F. R. Wilson.

  ‘A Treatise on Roads,’ by Sir H. Parnell.

  ‘Cremation of the Dead,’ by W. Eassie.

  ‘Experience sur le tirage des Voitures,’ by M. Morin.

  ‘Healthy Dwellings,’ by D. Galton.

  ‘Health of Towns Commission,’ sundry reports.

  ‘Law of Public Health and Local Government,’ by W. C. and A. Glen.

  ‘Local Board Manual,’ by Owen Harris.

  ‘New Mode of Constructing Streets,’ by J. Edgworth.

  ‘Plumbing and House Draining,’ by W. P. Buchan.

  ‘Practical Treatise on Roads,’ by A. Penfold.

  ‘Repair of Main Roads,’ by W. H. Wheeler.

  ‘Roads and Streets,’ by D. Kinnear Clark.

  ‘Roads, Streets, and Pavements,’ by Q. A. Gillmore.

  ‘Roads and Roadways,’ by G. W. Willcocks.

  ‘Remarks on the Present System of Road Making,’ &c., by John Loudon
  McAdam.

  ‘Sanitary Engineering,’ by Baldwin Latham.

  ‘Sanitary Engineering,’ by Bailey Denton.

  ‘Sanitary Work,’ by Charles Slagg.

  ‘Suggestions as to the Preparation of District Maps and of Plans for
  Main Sewerage, Drainage, and Water Supply,’ by Robert Rawlinson, C.B.,
  &c.

  ‘Street Pavements,’ by G. F. Crosby Dawson.

  ‘Steam Road Rolling,’ by Fred. A. Paget.

  ‘The Parks, Promenades, and Gardens of Paris,’ by W. Robinson.

  ‘The Public Health and Local Government Act,’ by J. Vesey Fitzgerald.

  ‘The Interments Act 1879,’ by T. Baker.

  ‘The Plumber and Sanitary Houses,’ by S. S. Hellyer.

  ‘The Maintenance of Macadamised Roads,’ by Thomas Codrington.

  ‘The true system of Wood Pavement,’ Anonymous.

  ‘The Surveyor of Highways,’ by Alex. Glen.

  ‘Tree Pruning,’ by A. des Cars.

  Various papers in the Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
  Engineers.

  Various papers in the Proceedings of the Sanitary Institute of Great
  Britain.

  Various papers in the Proceedings of the Association of Municipal and
  Sanitary Engineers and Surveyors.

  Various papers from the Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society.

  Various papers from the Reports on the Application of Science and Art
  to Street Paving.

  Various reports by Mr. Haywood, Engineer to the Commissioners of
  Sewers of the City of London.

  Various reports by Mr. Till, Surveyor of Birmingham.

  Various reports of Commissions, etc.

  [252] Mr. Parry, C.E., Borough Surveyor of Reading, says, “My
  experience of such works is that town authorities can obtain both
  labour and materials cheaper than contractors, and with efficient
  supervision the work costs less money.” (_Vide_ ‘Proceedings of the
  Association of Municipal and Sanitary Engineers and Surveyors,’ vol.
  iv. p. 89.)




INDEX.


  Abattoirs, 328
  Abrasion of stone, 48
  Accidents to horses, 31
  Accommodation in Cattle Market, 345
  Acland, Dr., on the surveyor, 4
  Acquisition of sewers, 252
  Acreage of sewage farms, 265
  Action of earth on sewage, 266
  Additions to old buildings, 210
  Advantage of plants for sewage, 270
  Advantages of asphalte, 99
  ---- public abattoirs, 343
  ---- separate system, 261
  ---- steam rolling, 70
  ---- wood paving, 89
  Alleys and courts if cleansed, 238
  Allotting numbers, 154
  Alteration of old building to new, 209
  American footpath, 114
  ---- paving, 77
  ---- road rolling, 65
  Analysis of asphalte, 97
  Angell Lewis on the surveyor, 6
  Angles of roads, 30
  Annihilation of sewer gases, 277
  Application to borrow, 376
  Appointment of surveyor, 1, 3, 10, 18
  Arc lights, 144
  Area of cemeteries, 354, 363
  ---- sewers, 253, 254
  Artificial asphalte, 117
  ---- stone pavements, 116
  Artizans’ dwellings, 284, 291
  Ashpits, 226
  Asphalte, Mac Adam, 46
  ---- mastic, 107
  ---- roadways, 96
  Asphaltic wood pavement, 82
  Automatic flushing, 262
  Aveling and Porter’s roller, 68
  Awnings over paths, 184

  Bargains. See Contracts
  Bars opening outwards, 178
  Bayley’s hydrostatic van, 245
  Best stones for pitchers, 75
  Bitumen, 96
  Bituminous concrete, 78
  ---- mixture, 79
  ---- roadways, 46
  Binding for roads, 62
  Blinds over paths, 184
  Blood-house, 341
  Books on drainage, 315
  ---- useful, 384
  Borrowing, 375
  Borders for paths, 320
  Bottles and brickbats, 225
  Bottoming roadways, 37
  Breakages in pipe sewers, 258
  Breaking stone, 48, 51
  Breaking-up streets, 157
  Brick footpaths, 116
  Bridges over streets, 33
  Broad irrigation, 265
  Brown’s street watering, 243
  Buildings, dangerous, 188
  ---- projections of, 176
  ---- new, 206
  ---- setting back, 175
  Buddle hole, 128
  Bullock lairs, 346
  ---- rollers, 60
  Burial fees, 356
  ---- in clay, 354
  Burners, gas, 140
  Burning refuse, 233
  Butchers, 329, 334
  Byelaws for new streets, &c., 206

  Cage for trees, 325
  Caithness flagging, 112
  Caldrons, 107
  Candle power, 136
  Canvassing, 19
  Capacities of surveyor, 5
  Carcel power, 136
  Carey’s wood pavement, 83
  Cart for scavenging, 230
  Cast-iron name plates, 151
  Cattle lairs, 333
  Cattle Market, 345
  Causes of breakages in pipes, 258
  Cellar coverings, 180
  ---- door projecting, 176
  ---- dwellings, 295
  Cemeteries, 350
  Channelling, 123
  Chapel mortuary, 369
  Chapels in cemeteries, 351
  Charcoal sewer ventilators, 275
  Chemical treatment of sewage, 268
  Chesterfield lighting, 129
  Chicago roads, 38
  Chimney shafts, 190
  ---- ---- ventilators, 275
  Chloride of calcium for watering, 247
  Choice of street names, 152
  Chokages in pipe sewers, 260
  Cisterns, objectionable, 302
  Clarke’s apparatus, 240
  Clay slate, 49
  Cleansing of streets, 234
  ---- private courts, &c., 238
  Climate and trees, 321
  Clinkers, 225
  Closing polluted well, 301
  ---- slaughter-houses, 330
  Coal plates, 182
  Coefficients of road metal, 51
  Collection of house refuse, 228
  Combined system of sewerage, 261
  Committees, 23
  Common line of frontage, 177
  Compensation for setting back, 175
  Composition of sewer gas, 278
  Compressed asphalte, 96
  Concrete, 78
  ---- footpaths, 113
  ---- pipes, 254
  Condemned meat, 339
  Connection with main sewers, 305
  Construction of asphalte roads, 98
  Contour of roadways, 43
  Contract with Gas Company, 132
  Contracts, 381
  ---- for scavenging, 249
  ---- surveyor must not be interested in, 3, 382
  Conversion into new building, 210
  Cost of asphalte, 101
  ---- chemical treatment, 264
  ---- electric light, 145
  ---- kerbing, 125
  ---- maintenance of macadamised roads, 34, 41
  ---- melting snow, 241
  ---- pipes, 254
  ---- scavenging, 248
  ---- tree planting, 326
  ---- watering, 244
  ---- wood pavement, 91
  ---- working steam rollers, 61, 63
  Core hard, 39
  Coroner’s court, 370
  Cremation, 361
  Crops for sewage farm, 265
  Croskey’s wood pavement, 82

  Damage to roads, 161
  ---- trees, 327
  Dangerous buildings, 188
  ---- crossings, 33
  Deacon on streets, 76
  Dead-house, 367, 369
  Declaration of public streets, 204
  Defacing numbers or names, 149
  Defects in dwellings, 295
  Defective cellar covers, 181
  ---- drains, 310
  Definition of new building, 208
  ---- sewer, 252
  ---- street, 149, 205
  Demolition of premises, 285
  Deposit of plans of streets, 210
  Depth of sewers, 253
  Diameter of drains, 315
  Diary of water-cart, 247
  Dimensions of lairs and pens, 347
  Disadvantages of steam rolling, 72
  Diseased meat, 339
  Disinfection, 371
  Disposal of refuse, 232
  ---- road scrapings, 237
  ---- sewage, 263
  Distance of lamps, 135
  ---- trees, 324
  Division of cemeteries, 355
  ---- England, 2
  Doors opening outwards, 178
  Down pipes, 183
  Drainage, 303
  ---- definition of, 303
  ---- of cemeteries, 351
  ---- slaughter-house, 335
  Drain-cleaning rods, 260
  Drains under houses, 316
  Draught on roads, 29
  Dry systems, 263
  Drying sludge, 269
  Dust-bins, 226
  Dusty streets, 234
  Duties of surveyor, 5, 7, 11, 20
  Dwellings and cemeteries, 350
  Dynamos, 141

  Earth as a sewage filter, 266
  Easements, 182
  Eaves shuting, 183
  Effect of traffic, 27
  Elasticity of asphalte, 104
  Electric lighting, 129, 140
  Enamelled name plates, 152
  Entrance to cattle market, 346
  Erection of hoardings or scaffolds, 187
  Escape from fire, 218
  Euston pavement, 77
  Evasion of Building Acts, 209
  Examination of surveyor, 14

  Fees for burials, 356
  Fences, 320
  Filling-in over pipes, 317
  Filters for sewage, 267
  Filtration of sewage, 266
  Fire protection, 218
  Fitness of stone, 48
  Flagging, York, 110
  ---- Caithness, 112
  ---- blue lias, 113
  Flag poles, 177
  Flints, 50
  Float observations, 265
  Flushing courts and alleys, 238
  Footpaths, 106
  ---- and snow, 241
  Force required on roads, 30
  Forms of Notice. See Notice
  Foundation of macadamised roads, 39
  French burial, 356
  Frontage of streets, 174
  Fryer’s destructor, 233
  Fuel for rollers, 61
  Furnaces as sewer ventilators, 276
  Furniture of mortuary, 369

  Gales and trees, 321
  Galton on borrowing, 379
  Garden refuse, 225
  Gas-burners, 140
  ---- lighting, 130
  Gates opening outwards, 178
  Gauge of stone, 52
  General markets, 348
  German dead-house, 368
  Germ theory, 271
  Glass name tablets, 152
  Gneiss, 49
  Good house drainage, 315
  Goux system, 233
  Gradients of house-drains, 316
  ---- roads, 30
  ---- sewers, 253
  ---- for rollers, 62
  Granite, 49
  ---- foot-pavement, 117
  ---- kerb, 124
  Grass, 320
  Grating for trees, 324
  Gravel footpaths, 121
  ---- 50
  Grave spaces, 360
  ---- yards, 350
  Green and Son’s roller, 69
  Grill for trees, 325
  Gritted asphalte, 108
  Ground floor, 208
  Grouting, 79
  Gulley gratings, 126

  Hammer-broken stone, 52
  Hand or hose watering, 244
  Hard core, 39
  Harrison’s wood pavement, 83
  Hayward on snow, 239
  Hayward’s pavement lights, 181
  Heads of scavenging, 224
  Healey’s boilers, 80
  Health of district, 288
  Henson’s wood pavement, 83
  Hide store, 341
  Highways, surveyor of, 20
  Hoardings, 187
  Hoisting machinery, 337
  Horse-shoes, 27
  House, definition of, 311
  ---- drainage, 303
  ---- refuse collection, 228
  ---- ---- disposal, 232
  ---- ---- destruction, 233
  ---- ---- removed, 223
  Houses unfit for habitation, 284
  Hydrostatic van, 245

  Illuminating power, 135
  Imperishable stone-paving blocks, 104
  Importation of trees, 322
  Improper water supply, 300
  Improved wood pavement, 81
  Improvement of courts and alleys, 287
  ---- streets, 174
  ---- private streets, 193
  Incandescent lamps, 144
  Inclination of roads, 30
  Individuals breaking-up streets, 169
  Industrial dwellings, 290
  Inertia of load, 32
  Ingredients used for precipitation, 269
  Inlets for fresh air into sewers, 273
  Inspection of drains, 305, 314
  ---- buildings, 217, 219
  Insufficient w.c. accommodation, 297
  Interception or dry systems, 263
  Intermittent filtration, 266
  Intersection of sewers, 254
  Iron name plates, 151
  Irrigation, 265

  Joints of pipe drains, 316
  Junction of drains, 307
  ---- sewers, 254

  Keeping sewers clean, 251
  Kerbing and channelling, 123
  Killing rings, 336

  Labourers’ dwellings, 284, 291
  Lairs for cattle, 333, 346
  Lamp-posts, 134
  ---- ---- as sewer ventilators, 274
  Land necessary for cemetery, 354
  Latrines, 282
  Laying out a cemetery, 354
  Leaky drains, 309
  Leaves as refuse, 225
  Letters for names, 152
  Lias flagging, 113
  Licence to break-up street, 172
  Lieurner system, 262
  Life of brooms, 235
  ---- carts, 231
  ---- paving stones, 76
  ---- wood, 88
  Lighting of slaughter-house, 336
  ---- streets, 129
  Ligno mineral pavement, 83
  Limestone, 49
  Lime-tree, 322
  Line of frontage, 177
  Lining of slaughter-house, 335
  List of borrowing powers, 376
  ---- chemical processes for sewage, 268
  ---- duties of surveyor, 5, 21
  ---- persons called surveyors, 4
  ---- road metal, 49
  ---- shrubs, 320
  ---- trees, 322
  ---- useful books, 384
  Liverpool scavenging, 235
  Lloyd’s wood pavement, 82
  Locomobiles, 107
  Loose stones on road, 45

  Macadamised roadways, 34
  Machinery for electricity, 141
  ---- in slaughter-house, 337
  Machines for sweeping, 234
  ---- stone-breaking, 53
  Management of cemetery, 358
  Manchester abattoir, 333
  ---- pavement, 78
  Manholes for sewers, 253
  Manufacturers’ refuse, 253
  Markets, 344
  Mastic asphalte, 107
  Materials of sewage filters, 267
  Mechanical subsidence of sewage, 267
  Meetings of committees, 23
  Melting snow, 240
  Merit, test of, 14
  Metal road, 48
  Meters for public lamps, 133
  Method of appointment, 18
  Methods of disposal of sewage, 264
  ---- lighting, 131
  ---- numbering, 153
  ---- sewerage, 261
  ---- sewer ventilation, 276
  Minton’s name plates, 151
  Model bye-laws, 207
  ---- lodging-houses, 291
  Metropolitan slaughter-house, 339
  Money, receipt of, 3
  Mortuaries, 365
  Mount Sorrel, 75
  Mowlem’s wood pavement, 83
  Muddy streets, 234

  Names of committees, 23
  Naming and numbering streets, 149
  Necessity for kerb, 123
  ---- slaughter-house, 328
  Newcastle lighting, 147
  New streets and buildings, 206
  Nicholson’s wood pavement, 84
  Norwich wood pavement, 84
  Notices to repair private streets, 198
  ---- of assessment of cost of ditto, 201
  ---- of defective drainage, 313
  ---- for breaking-up streets, 158
  ---- cellar coverings, 181
  ---- for dangerous building, 190
  ---- defective shuting, 183
  ---- doors and gates opening outwards, 179
  ---- insufficient w.c. accommodation, 298
  ---- numbering, 155
  ---- overhanging trees, 185
  ---- permission to break-up streets, 172
  ---- to construct sewers on private lands, 256
  ---- to erect buildings, 214
  ---- to open slaughter-house, 321
  ---- signature of, 313
  Number of graves in cemetery, 354

  Objections to asphalte, 100
  ---- macadamised roadways, 44
  ---- steam rolling, 72
  ---- York flagging, 110
  Observations of tides, 265
  Obstruction in streets, 174
  Obstructive buildings, 286
  Old tins, 225
  Opening graves, 356, 361
  Open space at back of buildings, 218
  ---- ventilating shafts, 272
  Ornamental shrubs, 320
  Outfalls of sewers, 265
  Overhanging trees, 185

  Paget on steam rolling, 71
  Pail system, 234
  Pails, 263
  Painted names, 151
  Painting urinals, 282
  Pamphlet on steam rolling, 65
  Papers, examination, 16
  Paris lighting, 135
  ---- roadways, cost of, 41
  ---- tree planting, 326
  Parks, 318
  Parry on contracts, 383
  ---- watering, 244
  Party walls through roofs, 218
  Paths in cemeteries, 355
  Partially separate system, 262
  Paving of Cattle Market, 346
  ---- lairs, 333, 346
  Pebbles, 50
  Pedestrian traffic, 33
  Pens for sheep, 333, 346
  Permission to break-up streets, 172
  ---- construct cellar, 182
  Persons called surveyor, 4
  Pig killing, 340
  Pinned roadways, 36, 39
  Pipe drains, 315
  ---- sewers, thickness, &c., 258
  ---- ---- diagrams, 259
  Pitch boilers, 80
  Pitched pavements, 73
  Plan for breaking-up streets, 160
  Plans of new streets or buildings, 210
  ---- of house drains, 317
  ---- for borrowing, 377
  ---- slaughter-house, 338
  Plane tree, 322
  Plants for sewage, 270
  Plaster not house refuse, 225
  Plates, name, 151
  Playgrounds, 318
  Pleasure grounds, 318, 350
  Paving of slaughter-house, 334
  Pole-axe, 336
  Polluted water supply, 291
  Porch, 176
  Portable dust-bins, 227
  Position of sewer, 254
  Post-mortem room, 370
  Powers to close slaughter-houses, 330
  Power to borrow, 375
  ---- make contracts, 381
  Precipitation of sewage, 268
  Preservation of wood, 86
  Private lands and sewer, 255
  ---- roads improvements, 204
  ---- slaughter-houses, 329
  ---- street improvements, 193
  Privies, 263
  Processes of chemical treatment, 268
  Projections, 176
  Proportions for asphalte, 109
  Prosser’s wood pavement, 85
  Protection of surveyor, 6, 8
  Pruning trees, 321
  Public abattoirs, 328
  ---- conveniences, 280
  ---- dust-bins, 228
  ---- lighting, 131
  ---- mortuaries, 365
  ---- works, 376
  Punctuality, 24

  Qualities of road metal, 49, 51
  Quantity of land for sewage farm, 265

  Rain-water pipes as ventilators, 274
  ---- ---- shutes, 183
  Rate collecting by surveyor, 3
  Rawlinson on borrowing, 377
  Receipt of money, 3
  Refuse, disposal of, 232
  ---- from manufactories, 253
  ---- receptacles, 229
  ---- trade and garden, 225
  Register of drains, 317
  ---- graves, 360
  Regulation of traffic, 33
  Regulations of cemeteries, 358, 360
  ---- connections with sewers, 305
  Regulations for breaking-up streets, 171
  Reinstating trenches, 162
  Removal of snow, 239
  ---- house refuse, 223
  Removing projections, 176
  Requirements of artizans’ dwellings, 291
  ---- drains, 317
  ---- roadways, 25
  Remuneration of surveyor, 7
  Reports, 24
  ---- on duties of surveyor, 10
  Resistance of wheels, 31
  Roads, private, improvement of, 204
  ---- in cemeteries, 355
  Roadway, specifications of, 35, 36
  Road metal, 48
  ---- ---- list of, 49
  ---- ---- specification of, 57
  ---- ---- weight of, 56
  ---- repairs, 66
  ---- rolling, 60
  ---- Roman, 73
  Ruts in roads, 45

  Safety in traffic, 31
  Sale rooms, 341
  Sanctuaries, 33
  Sandstone, 50
  Sanitary Institute of Great Britain, 14
  Scaffolds, 187
  Scavenging, 221
  ---- cart, 230
  Sea-water for watering, 247
  Section of roadway, 43
  ---- footpaths, 121
  Sections of cemetery, 356
  Security to be entered into, 3
  Selection of trees, 321, 322
  Separate system, 260, 262
  Setting back buildings, 175
  ---- kerb, 124
  Sewerage, 251
  Sewerage, system of, 253
  Sewer through private lands, 255
  Sewered, 195
  Sewage and plants, 270
  ---- crops for, 265
  ---- disposal, 263
  ---- filtration, 266, 267
  ---- irrigation, 265
  ---- mechanical subsidence, 267
  ---- precipitation, 268
  ---- screening, 267
  ---- value of, 265
  Sewer gas, 277
  ---- ventilation, 271
  Shafts for ventilation, 273
  Shed, 176
  Sheep pens, 333, 346
  Shiel’s composite pavement, 85
  Shone’s system, 262
  Shop blinds, 184
  Shrubs projecting, 176
  ---- 320
  ---- in cemeteries, 360
  Shutes, 183
  Shutter projecting, 176
  Sight rails, 257
  Sign projecting, 176
  Site for abattoir, 332
  ---- of Cattle Market, 345
  ---- for cemetery, 351
  Size of cellar covers, 181
  ---- drains, 316
  ---- graves, 356
  ---- pitchers, 74
  ---- rooms, 294
  ---- trees, 323
  Slaughter-houses, 328, 334
  Slaughtering, 342
  Slippery roads, 32
  Sludge, treatment of, 269
  Snow, removal of, 239, 241
  ---- on footpaths, 241
  Soil for cemetery, 352
  Soot on trees, 321
  Specific gravity of road metal, 49
  Specifications of roadway, 35, 36
  Specification for asphalte, 103
  ---- flagging, 110
  ---- for breaking-up streets, 161
  ---- of wood pavement, 94
  ---- road metal, 57
  ---- scavenging, 249
  ---- tar pavement, 118
  Stalls in markets, 349
  Stanford’s joint, 257
  Step projecting, 176
  Stone breaking, 48
  Store for hides, 341
  Stowe’s wood pavement, 84
  Street, breaking-up, 155
  ---- cleansing, 234
  ---- definition of, 149, 205
  ---- lighting, 129
  ---- lines, 174
  ---- private, improvements, 193
  ---- trees, 318
  ---- watering, 242
  Streets, new, 206
  Stringent bye-laws, 219
  Subjects requiring attention, 21
  Subways, 168
  Sugg’s regulator, 133
  Supervision of new buildings, 217
  Surface water over paths, 186
  Subsoil water, 261
  Surveyor, office first legalised, 1
  ---- appointment of, 1, 3, 10, 18
  ---- and private streets, 194
  ---- as rate collector, 3
  ---- duties of, 5, 7, 11, 20
  ---- examination of, 14
  ---- entry of, to see if new building, 209
  ---- may be also inspector of nuisances, 3
  ---- must not be interested in contracts, 3
  ---- of highways, 20
  ---- protection of, 6, 8
  Sweeping machines, 234
  Syenite, 49, 75

  Tables of cost of roadways, 41
  Table of scavenging, 236
  ---- watering, 246
  Tallow market, 341
  Tar paving, 118
  Telegraphs under or across roads, 164
  Telford, Thomas, 35
  Tell-tale on water-cart, 247
  Temporary obstructions, 192
  Testimonials, 18
  Test for asphalte, 97
  ---- brooms, 235
  ---- of good drains, 316
  ---- merit, 14
  Thames Embankment, lighting, 147
  Tides and outfalls, 265
  Tins as refuse, 225
  Title of surveyor, 4
  Town surveyor. See Surveyor
  Traction on roads, 28
  Trade refuse, 225
  Traffic, 25
  Tram track, 80
  Trap for drain, 317
  Trappean rock, 49
  Treatment of sludge, 269
  ---- wood, 86
  Trees, 318
  ---- in cemeteries, 360
  ---- overhanging, 185
  Trenches cut in roads, 161
  Toughness of stone, 48
  Tripery, 341
  Troughs for pig-dressing, 340

  Unhealthy areas, 288
  Urinals, 280
  Useful books, 384
  Use of steam rollers, 61

  Vacancy in office of surveyor, 10
  Value of sewage, 265
  Vans for watering, 245
  Vault or cellar coverings, 180
  ---- ---- under-path, 182
  Velocity in sewers, 254
  Ventilation of house drain, 317
  ---- mortuaries, 369
  ---- sewers, 271
  Vigilance of drain inspection, 309
  Visit of scavengers, 230

  Walls of cemeteries, 351
  ---- mortuaries, 369
  Wall projecting, 176
  ---- slaughter-house, 335
  Water and asphalte, 105
  ---- companies and streets, 157
  ---- for slaughter-house, 337
  ---- over footpaths, 186
  ---- supply to dwellings, 300
  W.C. accommodation, 280, 297
  ---- in factories, 299
  Watering streets, 242
  Wear of paving stones, 76
  Wearing effect of traffic, 27
  Weather on stone, 48
  Wheels, resistance of, 31
  Weighing machines, 348
  Weight of asphalte, 96
  ---- road metal, 56
  ---- rollers, 67
  ---- snow, 239
  Widening streets, 174
  Width of roadways, 32
  Window projecting, 176
  Wires for electricity, 141
  Wooden name plates, 152
  Wood paving, 81
  ---- treatment, 86
  ---- wear of, 88

  Yards behind buildings, 218
  York flagging, 110


LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, STAMFORD STREET AND
CHARING CROSS.




  BOOKS RELATING
  TO
  APPLIED SCIENCE
  PUBLISHED BY
  E. & F. N. SPON,
  LONDON: 16, CHARING CROSS.
  NEW YORK: 44, MURRAY STREET.


_A Pocket-Book for Chemists, Chemical Manufacturers, Metallurgists,
Dyers, Distillers, Brewers, Sugar Refiners, Photographers, Students,
etc., etc._ By THOMAS BAYLEY, Assoc. R.C. Sc. Ireland, Analytical and
Consulting Chemist and Assayer. Second edition, with additions, 437 pp.,
royal 32mo, roan, gilt edges, 5_s._

  SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS:

  Atomic Weights and Factors -- Useful Data -- Chemical Calculations --
  Rules for Indirect Analysis -- Weights and Measures -- Thermometers
  and Barometers -- Chemical Physics -- Boiling Points, etc. --
  Solubility of Substances -- Methods of Obtaining Specific Gravity --
  Conversion of Hydrometers -- Strength of Solutions by Specific Gravity
  -- Analysis -- Gas Analysis -- Water Analysis -- Qualitative Analysis
  and Reactions -- Volumetric Analysis -- Manipulation -- Mineralogy --
  Assaying -- Alcohol -- Beer -- Sugar -- Miscellaneous Technological
  matter relating to Potash, Soda, Sulphuric Acid, Chlorine, Tar
  Products, Petroleum, Milk, Tallow, Photography, Prices, Wages,
  Appendix, etc., etc.


_The Mechanician_: A Treatise on the Construction and Manipulation of
Tools, for the use and instruction of Young Engineers and Scientific
Amateurs, comprising the Arts of Blacksmithing and Forging; the
Construction and Manufacture of Hand Tools, and the various Methods of
Using and Grinding them; the Construction of Machine Tools, and how to
work them; Machine Fitting and Erection; description of Hand and Machine
Processes; Turning and Screw Cutting; principles of Constructing and
details of Making and Erecting Steam Engines, and the various details of
setting out work, etc., etc. By CAMERON KNIGHT, Engineer. _Containing
1147 illustrations_, and 397 pages of letter-press. Third edition, 4to,
cloth, 18_s._


_On Designing Belt Gearing._ By E. J. COWLING WELCH, Mem. Inst. Mech.
Engineers, Author of ‘Designing Valve Gearing.’ Fcap. 8vo, sewed, 6_d._


_A Handbook of Formulæ, Tables, and Memoranda, for Architectural
Surveyors and others engaged in Building._ By J. T. HURST, C.E.
Thirteenth edition, royal 32mo, roan, 5_s._

  “It is no disparagement to the many excellent publications we refer
  to, to say that in our opinion this little pocket-book of Hurst’s is
  the very best of them all, without any exception. It would be useless
  to attempt a recapitulation of the contents, for it appears to contain
  almost _everything_ that anyone connected with building could require,
  and, best of all, made up in a compact form for carrying in the
  pocket, measuring only 5 in. by 3 in., and about ¹⁄₄ in. thick, in a
  limp cover. We congratulate the author on the success of his laborious
  and practically compiled little book, which has received unqualified
  and deserved praise from every professional person to whom we have
  shown it.”--_The Dublin Builder._


_The Cabinet Maker_; being a Collection of the most approved designs in
the Mediæval, Louis-Seize, and Old English styles, for the use of
Cabinet Makers, Carvers, &c. By R. CHARLES. _96 plates_, folio,
half-bound, 10_s._ 6_d._


_Quantity Surveying._ By J. LEANING. With 42 illustrations, crown 8vo,
cloth, 9_s._

  CONTENTS:

  A complete Explanation of the London Practice.
  General Instructions.
  Order of Taking Off.
  Modes of Measurement of the various Trades.
  Use and Waste.
  Ventilation and Warming.
  Credits, with various Examples of Treatment.
  Abbreviations.
  Squaring the Dimensions.
  Abstracting, with Examples in illustration of each Trade.
  Billing.
  Examples of Preambles to each Trade.
  Form for a Bill of Quantities.
    Do.      Bill of Credits.
    Do.      Bill for Alternative Estimate.
  Restorations and Repairs, and Form of Bill.
  Variations before Acceptance of Tender.
  Errors in a Builder’s Estimate.
  Schedule of Prices.
  Form of Schedule of Prices.
  Analysis of Schedule of Prices.
  Adjustment of Accounts.
  Form of a Bill of Variations.
  Remarks on Specifications.
  Prices and Valuation of Work, with Examples and Remarks upon each
  Trade.
  The Law as it affects Quantity Surveyors, with Law Reports.
  Taking Off after the Old Method.
  Northern Practice.
  The General Statement of the Methods recommended by the Manchester
  Society of Architects for taking Quantities.
  Examples of Collections.
  Examples of “Taking Off” in each Trade.
  Remarks on the Past and Present Methods of Estimating.


_A Practical Treatise on Heat, as applied to the Useful Arts_; for the
Use of Engineers, Architects, &c. By THOMAS BOX. _With 14 plates._ Third
edition, crown 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_A Descriptive Treatise on Mathematical Drawing Instruments_: their
construction, uses, qualities, selection, preservation, and suggestions
for improvements, with hints upon Drawing and Colouring. By W. F.
STANLEY, M.R.I. Fifth edition, _with numerous illustrations_, crown 8vo,
cloth, 5_s._


_Spons’ Architects and Builders’ Pocket-Book of Prices and Memoranda._
Edited by W. YOUNG, Architect. Royal 32mo, roan, 4_s._ 6_d._; or cloth,
red edges, 3_s._ 6_d._ _Published annually._ Tenth edition. _Now ready._


_Long-Span Railway Bridges_, comprising Investigations of the
Comparative Theoretical and Practical Advantages of the various adopted
or proposed Type Systems of Construction, with numerous Formulæ and
Tables giving the weight of Iron or Steel required in Bridges from 300
feet to the limiting Spans; to which are added similar Investigations
and Tables relating to Short-span Railway Bridges. Second and revised
edition. By B. BAKER, Assoc. Inst. C.E. _Plates_, crown 8vo, cloth,
5_s._


_Elementary Theory and Calculation of Iron Bridges and Roofs._ By AUGUST
RITTER, Ph.D., Professor at the Polytechnic School at Aix-la-Chapelle.
Translated from the third German edition, by H. R. SANKEY, Capt. R.E.
With 500 _illustrations_, 8vo, cloth, 15_s._


_The Builder’s Clerk_: a Guide to the Management of a Builder’s
Business. By THOMAS BALES. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._


_The Elementary Principles of Carpentry._ By THOMAS TREDGOLD. Revised
from the original edition, and partly re-written, by JOHN THOMAS HURST.
Contained in 517 pages of letter-press, and _illustrated with 48 plates
and 150 wood engravings_. Third edition, crown 8vo, cloth, 18_s._

  Section I. On the Equality and Distribution of Forces -- Section II.
  Resistance of Timber -- Section III. Construction of Floors -- Section
  IV. Construction of Roofs -- Section V. Construction of Domes and
  Cupolas -- Section VI. Construction of Partitions -- Section VII.
  Scaffolds, Staging, and Gantries -- Section VIII. Construction of
  Centres for Bridges -- Section IX. Coffer-dams, Shoring, and Strutting
  -- Section X. Wooden Bridges and Viaducts -- Section XI. Joints,
  Straps, and other Fastenings -- Section XII. Timber.


_Our Factories, Workshops, and Warehouses_: their Sanitary and
Fire-Resisting Arrangements. By B. H. THWAITE, Assoc. Mem. Inst. C.E.
_With 183 wood engravings_, crown 8vo, cloth, 9_s._


_Gold_: Its Occurrence and Extraction, embracing the Geographical and
Geological Distribution and the Mineralogical Characters of Gold-bearing
rocks; the peculiar features and modes of working Shallow Placers,
Rivers, and Deep Leads; Hydraulicing; the Reduction and Separation of
Auriferous Quartz; the treatment of complex Auriferous ores containing
other metals; a Bibliography of the subject and a Glossary of Technical
and Foreign Terms. By ALFRED G. LOCK, F.R.G.S. _With numerous
illustrations and maps_, 1250 pp., super-royal 8vo, cloth, 2_l._ 12_s._
6_d._


_Progressive Lessons in Applied Science._ By EDWARD SANG, F.R.S.E. Crown
8vo, cloth, each Part, 3_s._

  Part 1. Geometry on Paper -- Part 2. Solidity, Weight, and Pressure --
  Part 3. Trigonometry, Vision, and Surveying Instruments.


_A Practical Treatise on Coal Mining._ By GEORGE G. ANDRÉ, F.G.S.,
Assoc. Inst. C.E., Member of the Society of Engineers. _With 82
lithographic plates._ 2 vols., royal 4to, cloth, 3_l._ 12_s._


_Sugar Growing and Refining_: a Comprehensive Treatise on the Culture of
Sugar-yielding Plants, and the Manufacture, Refining, and Analysis of
Cane, Beet, Maple, Milk, Palm, Sorghum, and Starch Sugars, with copious
statistics of their production and commerce, and a chapter on the
distillation of Rum. By CHARLES G. WARNFORD LOCK, F.L.S., &c., and G. W.
WIGNER and R. H. HARLAND, FF.C.S., FF.I.C. _With 205 illustrations_,
8vo, cloth, 30_s._


_Spons’ Information for Colonial Engineers._ Edited by J. T. HURST. Demy
8vo, sewed.


  No. 1, Ceylon. By ABRAHAM DEANE, C.E. 2_s._ 6_d._

  CONTENTS:

  Introductory Remarks -- Natural Productions -- Architecture and
  Engineering -- Topography, Trade, and Natural History -- Principal
  Stations -- Weights and Measures, etc., etc.


  No. 2. Southern Africa, including the Cape Colony, Natal, and the
  Dutch Republics. By HENRY HALL, F.R.G.S., F.R.C.I. With Map. 3_s._
  6_d._

  CONTENTS:

  General Description of South Africa -- Physical Geography with
  reference to Engineering Operations -- Notes on Labour and Material in
  Cape Colony -- Geological Notes on Rock Formation in South Africa --
  Engineering Instruments for Use in South Africa -- Principal Public
  Works in Cape Colony: Railways, Mountain Roads and Passes, Harbour
  Works, Bridges, Gas Works, Irrigation and Water Supply, Lighthouses,
  Drainage and Sanitary Engineering, Public Buildings, Mines -- Table of
  Woods in South Africa -- Animals used for Draught Purposes --
  Statistical Notes -- Table of Distances -- Rates of Carriage, etc.


  No. 3. India. By F. C. DANVERS, Assoc. Inst. C.E. With Map. 4_s._
  6_d._

  CONTENTS:

  Physical Geography of India -- Building Materials -- Roads -- Railways
  -- Bridges -- Irrigation -- River Works -- Harbours -- Lighthouse
  Buildings -- Native Labour -- The Principal Trees of India -- Money --
  Weights and Measures -- Glossary of Indian Terms, etc.


_A Practical Treatise on Casting and Founding_, including descriptions
of the modern machinery employed in the art. By N. E. SPRETSON,
Engineer. Third edition, with 82 _plates_ drawn to scale, 412 pp., demy
8vo, cloth, 18_s._


_The Clerk of Works_: a Vade-Mecum for all engaged in the
Superintendence of Building Operations. By G. G. HOSKINS, F.R.I.B.A.
Third edition, fcap. 8vo, cloth, 1_s._ 6_d._


_Tropical Agriculture_; or, the Culture, Preparation, Commerce, and
Consumption of the Principal Products of the Vegetable Kingdom, as
furnishing Food, Clothing, Medicine, etc., and in their relation to the
Arts and Manufactures; forming a practical treatise and Handbook of
Reference for the Colonist, Manufacturer, Merchant, and Consumer, on the
Cultivation, Preparation for Shipment, and Commercial Value, etc., of
the various Substances obtained from Trees and Plants entering into the
Husbandry of Tropical and Sub-Tropical Regions. By P. L. SIMMONDS.
Second edition, revised and improved, 515 pages, 8vo, cloth, 1_l._ 1_s._


_Steel: its History, Manufacture, and Uses._ By J. S. JEANS, Secretary
of the Iron and Steel Institute. 860 pages and 24 _plates_, 8vo, cloth,
36_s._


_American Foundry Practice_: Treating of Loam, Dry Sand, and Green Sand
Moulding, and containing a Practical Treatise upon the Management of
Cupolas, and the Melting of Iron. By T. D. WEST, Practical Iron Moulder
and Foundry Foreman. Second edition, _with numerous illustrations_,
crown 8vo, cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._


_The Maintenance of Macadamised Roads._ By T. CODRINGTON, M.I.C.E,
F.G.S., General Superintendent of County Roads for South Wales. 8vo,
cloth, 6_s._


_Hydraulic Steam and Hand Power Lifting and Pressing Machinery._ By
FREDERICK COLYER, M. Inst. C.E., M. Inst. M.E. _With 73 plates_, 8vo,
cloth, 18_s._


_Pumps and Pumping Machinery._ By F. COLYER, M.I.C.E., M.I.M.E. _With 23
folding plates_, 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_Tables of the Principal Speeds occurring in Mechanical Engineering_,
expressed in metres in a second. By P. KEERAYEFF, Chief Mechanic of the
Obouchoff Steel Works, St. Petersburg; translated by SERGIUS KERN, M.E.
Fcap. 8vo, sewed, 6_d._


_Girder Making and the Practice of Bridge Building in Wrought Iron_,
illustrated by Examples of Bridges, Piers, and Girder Work, etc.,
constructed at the Skerne Iron Works, Darlington, by EDWARD HUTCHINSON,
M. Inst. M.E. _With 35 plates_, demy 8vo, cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._


_Spons’ Dictionary of Engineering, Civil, Mechanical, Military, and
Naval_; with technical terms in French, German, Italian, and Spanish,
3100 pp., and _nearly 8000 engravings_, in super-royal 8vo, in 8
divisions, 5_l._ 8_s._ Complete in 3 vols., cloth, 5_l._ 5_s._ Bound in
a superior manner, half-morocco, top edge gilt, 3 vols., 6_l._ 12_s._

  _See page 15._


_A Treatise on the Origin, Progress, Prevention, and Cure of Dry Rot in
Timber_; with Remarks on the Means of Preserving Wood from Destruction
by Sea-Worms, Beetles, Ants, etc. By THOMAS ALLEN BRITTON, late Surveyor
to the Metropolitan Board of Works, etc., etc. _With 10 plates_, crown
8vo, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._


_Metrical Tables._ By G. L. MOLESWORTH, M.I.C.E. 32mo, cloth, 1_s._
6_d._

  CONTENTS.

  General -- Linear Measures -- Square Measures -- Cubic Measures --
  Measures of Capacity -- Weights -- Combinations -- Thermometers.


_A Handbook of Electrical Testing._ By H. R. KEMPE, Member of the
Society of Telegraph Engineers. New edition, revised and enlarged, _with
81 illustrations_. Crown 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_Electro-Telegraphy._ By FREDERICK S. BEECHEY, Telegraph Engineer. A
Book for Beginners. _Illustrated._ Fcap. 8vo, sewed, 6_d._


_Handrailing: by the Square Cut._ By JOHN JONES, Staircase Builder.
Fourth edition, _with seven plates_, 8vo, cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._


_Handrailing: by the Square Cut._ By JOHN JONES, Staircase Builder. Part
Second, _with eight plates_, 8vo, cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._


_The Gas Consumer’s Handy Book._ By WILLIAM RICHARDS, C.E.
_Illustrated._ 18mo, sewed, 6_d._


_Steam Heating for Buildings_; or, Hints to Steam Fitters, being a
description of Steam Heating Apparatus for Warming and Ventilating
Private Houses and large Buildings; with Remarks on Steam, Water, and
Air in their relation to Heating; to which are added miscellaneous
Tables. By J. W. BALDWIN, Steam Heating Engineer. _With many
illustrations._ Second edition, crown 8vo, cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._


_A Pocket-Book of Useful Formulæ and Memoranda for Civil and Mechanical
Engineers._ By GUILFORD L. MOLESWORTH, Mem. Inst. C.E., Consulting
Engineer to the Government of India for State Railways. _With numerous
illustrations_, 744 pp. Twenty-first edition, revised and enlarged,
32mo, roan, 6_s._

  SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS:

  Surveying, Levelling, etc. -- Strength and Weight of Materials --
  Earthwork, Brickwork, Masonry, Arches, etc. -- Struts, Columns, Beams,
  and Trusses -- Flooring, Roofing, and Roof Trusses -- Girders,
  Bridges, etc. -- Railways and Roads -- Hydraulic Formulæ -- Canals,
  Sewers, Waterworks, Docks -- Irrigation and Breakwaters -- Gas,
  Ventilation, and Warming -- Heat, Light, Colour, and Sound -- Gravity:
  Centres, Forces, and Powers -- Millwork, Teeth of Wheels, Shafting,
  etc. -- Workshop Recipes -- Sundry Machinery -- Animal Power -- Steam
  and the Steam Engine -- Water-power, Water-wheels, Turbines, etc. --
  Wind and Windmills -- Steam Navigation, Ship Building, Tonnage, etc.
  -- Gunnery, Projectiles, etc. -- Weights, Measures, and Money --
  Trigonometry, Conic Sections, and Curves -- Telegraphy -- Mensuration
  -- Tables of Areas and Circumference, and Arcs of Circles --
  Logarithms, Square and Cube Roots, Powers -- Reciprocals, etc. --
  Useful Numbers -- Differential and Integral Calculus -- Algebraic
  Signs -- Telegraphic Construction and Formulæ.


_Spons’ Tables and Memoranda for Engineers_; selected and arranged by J.
T. HURST, C.E., Author of ‘Architectural Surveyors’ Handbook,’ ‘Hurst’s
Tredgold’s Carpentry,’ etc. Fifth edition, 64mo, roan, gilt edges,
1_s._; or in cloth case, 1_s_. 6_d_.

  This work is printed in a pearl type, and is so small, measuring only
  2¹⁄₂ in. by 1³⁄₄ in. by ¹⁄₄ in. thick, that it may be easily carried
  in the waistcoat pocket.

  “It is certainly an extremely rare thing for a reviewer to be called
  upon to notice a volume measuring but 2¹⁄₂ in. by 1³⁄₄ in., yet these
  dimensions faithfully represent the size of the handy little book
  before us. The volume--which contains 118 printed pages, besides a few
  blank pages for memoranda--is, in fact, a true pocket-book, adapted
  for being carried in the waistcoat pocket, and containing a far
  greater amount and variety of information than most people would
  imagine could be compressed into so small a space. . . . . The little
  volume has been compiled with considerable care and judgment, and we
  can cordially recommend it to our readers as a useful little pocket
  companion.”--_Engineering._


_Analysis, Technical Valuation, Purification and Use of Coal Gas._ By
the Rev. W. R. BOWDITCH, M.A. _With wood engravings_, 8vo, cloth, 12_s_.
6_d_.

  Condensation of Gas -- Purification of Gas -- Light -- Measuring --
  Place of Testing Gas -- Test Candles -- The Standard for Measuring
  Gas-light -- Test Burners -- Testing Gas for Sulphur -- Testing Gas
  for Ammonia -- Condensation by Bromine -- Gravimetric Method of taking
  Specific Gravity of Gas -- Carburetting or Naphthalizing Gas --
  Acetylene -- Explosions of Gas -- Gnawing of Gaspipes by Rats --
  Pressure as related to Public Lighting, etc.


_A Practical Treatise on Natural and Artificial Concrete, its Varieties
and Constructive Adaptations._ By HENRY REID, Author of the ‘Science and
Art of the Manufacture of Portland Cement.’ New Edition, _with 59
woodcuts and 5 plates_, 8vo, cloth, 15_s_.


_Hydrodynamics_: Treatise relative to the Testing of Water-Wheels and
Machinery, with various other matters pertaining to Hydrodynamics. By
JAMES EMERSON. _With numerous illustrations_, 360 pp. Third edition,
crown 8vo, cloth, 4_s_. 6_d_.


_The Gas Analyst’s Manual._ By F. W. HARTLEY, Assoc. Inst. C.E., etc.
_With numerous illustrations._ Crown 8vo, cloth, 6_s._


_Gas Measurement and Gas Meter Testing._ By F. W. HARTLEY. Fourth
edition, revised and extended. _Illustrated_, crown 8vo, cloth, 4_s._


_The French-Polishers Manual._ By a French-Polisher; containing Timber
Staining, Washing, Matching, Improving, Painting, Imitations, Directions
for Staining, Sizing, Embodying, Smoothing, Spirit Varnishing,
French-Polishing, Directions for Repolishing. Third edition, royal 32mo,
sewed, 6_d._


_Hops, their Cultivation, Commerce, and Uses in various Countries._ By
P. L. SIMMONDS. Crown 8vo, cloth, 4_s._ 6_d._


_A Practical Treatise on the Manufacture and Distribution of Coal Gas._
By WILLIAM RICHARDS. Demy 4to, with _numerous wood engravings and 29
plates_, cloth, 28_s._

  SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS:

  Introduction -- History of Gas Lighting -- Chemistry of Gas
  Manufacture, by Lewis Thompson, Esq., M.R.C.S. -- Coal, with Analyses,
  by J. Paterson, Lewis Thompson, and G. R. Hislop, Esqrs. -- Retorts,
  Iron and Clay -- Retort Setting -- Hydraulic Main -- Condensers --
  Exhausters -- Washers and Scrubbers -- Purifiers -- Purification --
  History of Gas Holder -- Tanks, Brick and Stone, Composite, Concrete,
  Cast-iron, Compound Annular Wrought-iron -- Specifications -- Gas
  Holders -- Station Meter -- Governor -- Distribution -- Mains -- Gas
  Mathematics, or Formulæ for the Distribution of Gas, by Lewis
  Thompson, Esq. -- Services -- Consumers’ Meters -- Regulators --
  Burners -- Fittings -- Photometer -- Carburization of Gas -- Air Gas
  and Water Gas -- Composition of Coal Gas, by Lewis Thompson, Esq. --
  Analyses of Gas -- Influence of Atmospheric Pressure and Temperature
  on Gas -- Residual Products -- Appendix -- Description of Retort
  Settings, Buildings, etc., etc.


_Practical Geometry and Engineering Drawing_; a Course of Descriptive
Geometry adapted to the Requirements of the Engineering Draughtsman,
including the determination of cast shadows and Isometric Projection,
each chapter being followed by numerous examples; to which are added
rules for Shading, Shade-lining, etc., together with practical
instructions as to the Lining, Colouring, Printing, and general
treatment of Engineering Drawings, with a chapter on drawing
Instruments. By GEORGE S. CLARKE, Lieut. R.E., Instructor in Mechanical
Drawing, Royal Indian Engineering College. 20 _plates_, 4to, cloth,
15_s._


_The Elements of Graphic Statics._ By Professor KARL VON OTT, translated
from the German by G. S. CLARKE, Lieut. R.E., Instructor in Mechanical
Drawing, Royal Indian Engineering College. _With 93 illustrations_,
crown 8vo, cloth, 5_s._


_The Principles of Graphic Statics._ By GEORGE SYDENHAM CLARKE, Lieut.
Royal Engineers. _With 112 illustrations_. 4to, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_The New Formula for Mean Velocity of Discharge of Rivers and Canals._
By W. R. KUTTER. Translated from articles in the ‘Cultur-Ingenieur,’ by
LOWIS D’A. JACKSON, Assoc. Inst. C.E. 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_Practical Hydraulics_; a Series of Rules and Tables for the use of
Engineers, etc., etc. By THOMAS BOX. Fifth edition, _numerous plates_,
post 8vo, cloth, 5_s._


_A Practical Treatise on the Construction of Horizontal and Vertical
Waterwheels_, specially designed for the use of operative mechanics. By
WILLIAM CULLEN, Millwright and Engineer. _With 11 plates._ Second
edition, revised and enlarged, small 4to, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_Aid Book to Engineering Enterprise Abroad._ By EWING MATHESON, M. Inst.
C.E. The book treats of Public Works and Engineering Enterprises in
their inception and preliminary arrangement; of the different modes in
which money is provided for their accomplishment; and of the economical
and technical considerations by which success or failure is determined.
The information necessary to the designs of Engineers is classified, as
are also those particulars by which Contractors may estimate the cost of
works, and Capitalists the probabilities of profit. _Illustrated_, 2
vols., 8vo, 12_s._ 6_d._ each.


_The Essential Elements of Practical Mechanics; based on the Principle
of Work_, designed for Engineering Students. By OLIVER BYRNE, formerly
Professor of Mathematics, College for Civil Engineers. Third edition,
_with 148 wood engravings_, post 8vo, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._

  CONTENTS:

  Chap. 1. How Work is Measured by a Unit, both with and without
  reference to a Unit of Time -- Chap. 2. The Work of Living Agents, the
  Influence of Friction, and introduces one of the most beautiful Laws
  of Motion -- Chap. 3. The principles expounded in the first and second
  chapters are applied to the Motion of Bodies -- Chap. 4. The
  Transmission of Work by simple Machines -- Chap. 5. Useful
  Propositions and Rules.


_The Practical Millwright’s and Engineer’s Ready Reckoner_; or Tables
for finding the diameter and power of cog-wheels, diameter, weight, and
power of shafts, diameter and strength of bolts, etc. By THOMAS DIXON.
Fourth edition, 12mo, cloth, 3_s._


_Breweries and Maltings_: their Arrangement, Construction, Machinery,
and Plant. By G. SCAMELL, F.R.I.B.A. Second edition, revised, enlarged,
and partly rewritten. By F. COLYER, M.I.C.E., M.I.M.E. _With 20 plates_,
8vo, cloth, 18_s._


_A Practical Treatise on the Manufacture of Starch, Glucose,
Starch-Sugar, and Dextrine_, based on the German of L. VON WAGNER,
Professor in the Royal Technical School, Buda Pesth, and other
authorities. By JULIUS FRANKEL; edited by ROBERT HUTTER, proprietor of
the Philadelphia Starch Works. _With 58 illustrations_, 344 pp., 8vo,
cloth, 18_s._


_A Practical Treatise on Mill-gearing, Wheels, Shafts, Riggers, etc._;
for the use of Engineers. By THOMAS BOX. Third edition, _with 11
plates_. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._


_Mining Machinery_: a Descriptive Treatise on the Machinery, Tools, and
other Appliances used in Mining. By G. G. ANDRÉ, F.G.S., Assoc. Inst.
C.E., Mem. of the Society of Engineers. Royal 4to, uniform with the
Author’s Treatise on Coal Mining, containing 182 _plates_, accurately
drawn to scale, with descriptive text, in 2 vols., cloth, 3_l._ 12_s._

  CONTENTS:

  Machinery for Prospecting, Excavating, Hauling, and Hoisting --
  Ventilation -- Pumping -- Treatment of Mineral Products, including
  Gold and Silver, Copper, Tin, and Lead, Iron, Coal, Sulphur, China
  Clay, Brick Earth, etc.


_Tables for Setting out Curves for Railways, Canals, Roads, etc._,
varying from a radius of five chains to three miles. By A. KENNEDY and
R. W. HACKWOOD. _Illustrated_, 32mo, cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._


_The Science and Art of the Manufacture of Portland Cement_, with
observations on some of its constructive applications. _With 66
illustrations._ By HENRY REID, C.E., Author of ‘A Practical Treatise on
Concrete,’ etc., etc. 8vo, cloth, 18_s._


_The Draughtsman’s Handbook of Plan and Map Drawing_; including
instructions for the preparation of Engineering, Architectural, and
Mechanical Drawings. _With numerous illustrations in the text, and 33
plates (15 printed in colours)._ By G. G. ANDRÉ, F.G.S., Assoc. Inst.
C.E. 4to, cloth, 9_s._

  CONTENTS:

  The Drawing Office and its Furnishings -- Geometrical Problems --
  Lines, Dots, and their Combinations -- Colours, Shading, Lettering,
  Bordering, and North Points -- Scales -- Plotting -- Civil Engineers’
  and Surveyors’ Plans -- Map Drawing -- Mechanical and Architectural
  Drawing -- Copying and Reducing Trigonometrical Formulæ, etc., etc.


_The Boiler-maker’s and Iron Ship-builder’s Companion_, comprising a
series of original and carefully calculated tables, of the utmost
utility to persons interested in the iron trades. By JAMES FODEN, author
of ‘Mechanical Tables,’ etc. Second edition revised, _with
illustrations_, crown 8vo, cloth, 5_s._


_Rock Blasting_: a Practical Treatise on the means employed in Blasting
Rocks for Industrial Purposes. By G. G. ANDRÉ, F.G.S., Assoc. Inst. C.E.
_With 56 illustrations and 12 plates_, 8vo, cloth, 10_s._ 6_d._


_Surcharged and different Forms of Retaining Walls._ By J. S. TATE.
_Illustrated_, 8vo, sewed, 2_s._


_A Treatise on Ropemaking as practised in public and private
Rope-yards_, with a Description of the Manufacture, Rules, Tables of
Weights, etc., adapted to the Trade, Shipping, Mining, Railways,
Builders, etc. By R. CHAPMAN, formerly foreman to Messrs. Huddart and
Co., Limehouse, and late Master Ropemaker to H.M. Dockyard, Deptford.
Second edition, 12mo, cloth, 3_s._


_Laxton’s Builders’ and Contractors’ Tables_; for the use of Engineers,
Architects, Surveyors, Builders, Land Agents, and others. Bricklayer,
containing 22 tables, with nearly 30,000 calculations. 4to, cloth, 5_s._


_Laxton’s Builders’ and Contractors’ Tables._ Excavator, Earth, Land,
Water, and Gas, containing 53 tables, with nearly 24,000 calculations.
4to, cloth, 5_s._


_Sanitary Engineering_: a Guide to the Construction of Works of Sewerage
and House Drainage, with Tables for facilitating the calculations of the
Engineer. By BALDWIN LATHAM, C.E., M. Inst. C.E., F.G.S., F.M.S.,
Past-President of the Society of Engineers. Second edition, _with
numerous plates and woodcuts_, 8vo, cloth, 1_l._ 10_s._


_Screw Cutting Tables for Engineers and Machinists_, giving the values
of the different trains of Wheels required to produce Screws of any
pitch, calculated by Lord Lindsay, M.P., F.R.S., F.R.A.S., etc. Royal
8vo, cloth, oblong, 2_s._


_Screw Cutting Tables_, for the use of Mechanical Engineers, showing the
proper arrangement of Wheels for cutting the Threads of Screws of any
required pitch, with a Table for making the Universal Gas-pipe Threads
and Taps. By W. A. MARTIN, Engineer. Second edition, royal 8vo, oblong,
cloth, 1_s._, or sewed, 6_d._


_A Treatise on a Practical Method of Designing Slide-Valve Gears by
Simple Geometrical Construction_, based upon the principles enunciated
in Euclid’s Elements, and comprising the various forms of Plain
Slide-Valve and Expansion Gearing; together with Stephenson’s, Gooch’s,
and Allan’s Link-Motions, as applied either to reversing or to variable
expansion combinations. By EDWARD J. COWLING WELCH, Memb. Inst.
Mechanical Engineers. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6_s._


_Cleaning and Scouring_: a Manual for Dyers, Laundresses, and for
Domestic Use. By S. CHRISTOPHER. 18mo, sewed, 6_d._


_A Handbook of House Sanitation_; for the use of all persons seeking a
Healthy Home. A reprint of those portions of Mr. Bailey-Denton’s
Lectures on Sanitary Engineering, given before the School of Military
Engineering, which related to the “Dwelling,” enlarged and revised by
his Son, E. F. BAILEY-DENTON, C.E., B.A. _With 140 illustrations_, 8vo,
cloth, 8_s._ 6_d._


_Treatise on Valve-Gears_, with special consideration of the
Link-Motions of Locomotive Engines. By Dr. GUSTAV ZEUNER. Third edition,
revised and enlarged, translated from the German, with the special
permission of the author, by MORITZ MÜLLER. _Plates_, 8vo, cloth, 12_s._
6_d._


_A Pocket-Book for Boiler Makers and Steam Users_, comprising a variety
of useful information for Employer and Workman, Government Inspectors,
Board of Trade Surveyors, Engineers in charge of Works and Slips,
Foremen of Manufactories, and the general Steam-using Public. By MAURICE
JOHN SEXTON. Second edition, royal 32mo, roan, gilt edges, 5_s._


_The Strains upon Bridge Girders and Roof Trusses_, including the
Warren, Lattice, Trellis, Bowstring, and other Forms of Girders, the
Curved Roof, and Simple and Compound Trusses. By THOS. CARGILL,
C.E.B.A.T., C.D., Assoc. Inst. C.E., Member of the Society of Engineers.
_With 64 illustrations, drawn and worked out to scale_, 8vo, cloth,
12_s._ 6_d._


_A Practical Treatise on the Steam Engine_, containing Plans and
Arrangements of Details for Fixed Steam Engines, with Essays on the
Principles involved in Design and Construction. By ARTHUR RIGG,
Engineer, Member of the Society of Engineers and of the Royal
Institution of Great Britain. Demy 4to, _copiously illustrated with
woodcuts and 96 plates_, in one Volume, half-bound morocco, 2_l._ 2_s._;
or cheaper edition, cloth, 25_s_.

  This work is not, in any sense, an elementary treatise, or history of
  the steam engine, but is intended to describe examples of Fixed Steam
  Engines without entering into the wide domain of locomotive or marine
  practice. To this end illustrations will be given of the most recent
  arrangements of Horizontal, Vertical, Beam, Pumping, Winding,
  Portable, Semi-portable, Corliss, Allen, Compound, and other similar
  Engines, by the most eminent Firms in Great Britain and America. The
  laws relating to the action and precautions to be observed in the
  construction of the various details, such as Cylinders, Pistons,
  Piston-rods, Connecting-rods, Cross-heads, Motion-blocks, Eccentrics,
  Simple, Expansion, Balanced, and Equilibrium Slide-valves, and
  Valve-gearing will be minutely dealt with. In this connection will be
  found articles upon the Velocity of Reciprocating Parts and the Mode
  of Applying the Indicator, Heat and Expansion of Steam Governors, and
  the like. It is the writer’s desire to draw illustrations from every
  possible source, and give only those rules that present practice deems
  correct.


_Barlow’s Tables of Squares, Cubes, Square Roots, Cube Roots,
Reciprocals of all Integer Numbers up to 10,000._ Post 8vo, cloth, 6_s._


_Camus (M.) Treatise on the Teeth of Wheels_, demonstrating the best
forms which can be given to them for the purposes of Machinery, such as
Mill-work and Clock-work, and the art of finding their numbers.
Translated from the French, with details of the present practice of
Millwrights, Engine Makers, and other Machinists, by ISAAC HAWKINS.
Third edition, _with 18 plates_, 8vo, cloth, 5_s._


_A Practical Treatise on the Science of Land and Engineering Surveying,
Levelling, Estimating Quantities, etc._, with a general description of
the several Instruments required for Surveying, Levelling, Plotting,
etc. By H. S. MERRETT. Third edition, _41 plates with illustrations and
tables_, royal 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._

  PRINCIPAL CONTENTS:

  Part 1. Introduction and the Principles of Geometry. Part 2. Land
  Surveying; comprising General Observations -- The Chain -- Offsets
  Surveying by the Chain only -- Surveying Hilly Ground -- To Survey an
  Estate or Parish by the Chain only -- Surveying with the Theodolite --
  Mining and Town Surveying -- Railroad Surveying -- Mapping -- Division
  and Laying out of Land -- Observations on Enclosures -- Plane
  Trigonometry. Part 3. Levelling -- Simple and Compound Levelling --
  The Level Book -- Parliamentary Plan and Section -- Levelling with a
  Theodolite -- Gradients -- Wooden Curves -- To Lay out a Railway Curve
  -- Setting out Widths. Part 4. Calculating Quantities generally for
  Estimates -- Cuttings and Embankments -- Tunnels -- Brickwork --
  Ironwork -- Timber Measuring. Part 5. Description and Use of
  Instruments in Surveying and Plotting -- The Improved Dumpy Level --
  Troughton’s Level -- The Prismatic Compass -- Proportional Compass --
  Box Sextant -- Vernier -- Pantagraph -- Merrett’s Improved Quadrant --
  Improved Computation Scale -- The Diagonal Scale -- Straight Edge and
  Sector. Part 6. Logarithms of Numbers -- Logarithmic Sines and
  Co-Sines, Tangents and Co-Tangents -- Natural Sines and Co-Sines --
  Tables for Earthwork, for Setting out Curves, and for various
  Calculations, etc., etc., etc.


_Saws: the History, Development, Action, Classification, and Comparison
of Saws of all kinds._ By ROBERT GRIMSHAW. _With 220 illustrations_,
4to, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_A Supplement to the above_; containing additional practical matter,
more especially relating to the forms of Saw Teeth for special material
and conditions, and to the behaviour of Saws under particular
conditions. _With 120 illustrations_, cloth, 9_s._


_A Guide for the Electric Testing of Telegraph Cables._ By Capt. V.
HOSKIŒR, Royal Danish Engineers. _With illustrations_, second edition,
crown 8vo, cloth, 4_s._ 6_d._


_Laying and Repairing Electric Telegraph Cables._ By Capt. V. HOSKIŒR,
Royal Danish Engineers. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._


_A Pocket-Book of Practical Rules for the Proportions of Modern Engines
and Boilers for Land and Marine purposes._ By N. P. BURGH. Seventh
edition, royal 32mo, roan, 4_s._ 6_d._


_Table of Logarithms of the Natural Numbers, from 1 to 108,000._ By
CHARLES BABBAGE, Esq., M.A. Stereotyped edition, royal 8vo, cloth, 7_s._
6_d._

  To ensure the correctness of these Tables of Logarithms, they were
  compared with Callett’s, Vega’s, Hutton’s, Briggs’, Gardiner’s, and
  Taylor’s Tables of Logarithms, and carefully read by nine different
  readers; and further, to remove any possibility of an error remaining,
  the stereotyped sheets were hung up in the Hall at Cambridge
  University, and a reward offered to anyone who could find an
  inaccuracy. So correct are these Tables, that since their first issue
  in 1827 no error has been discovered.


_The Steam Engine considered as a Heat Engine_: a Treatise on the Theory
of the Steam Engine, illustrated by Diagrams, Tables, and Examples from
Practice. By JAS. H. COTTERILL, M.A., F.R.S., Professor of Applied
Mechanics in the Royal Naval College. 8vo, cloth, 12_s._ 6_d._


_The Practice of Hand Turning in Wood, Ivory, Shell, etc._, with
Instructions for Turning such Work in Metal as may be required in the
Practice of Turning in Wood, Ivory, etc.; also an Appendix on Ornamental
Turning. (A book for beginners.) By FRANCIS CAMPIN. Second edition,
_with wood engravings_, crown 8vo, cloth, 6_s._

  CONTENTS:

  On Lathes -- Turning Tools -- Turning Wood -- Drilling -- Screw
  Cutting -- Miscellaneous Apparatus and Processes -- Turning Particular
  Forms -- Staining -- Polishing -- Spinning Metals -- Materials --
  Ornamental Turning, etc.


_Health and Comfort in House Building, or Ventilation with Warm Air by
Self-Acting Suction Power_, with Review of the mode of Calculating the
Draught in Hot-Air Flues, and with some actual Experiments. By J.
DRYSDALE, M.D., and J. W. HAYWARD, M.D. Second edition, with Supplement,
_with plates_, demy 8vo, cloth, 7_s._ 6_d._


_Treatise on Watchwork, Past and Present._ By the Rev. H. L. NELTHROPP,
M.A., F.S.A. _With 32 illustrations_, crown 8vo, cloth, 6_s._ 6_d._

  CONTENTS:

  Definitions of Words and Terms used in Watchwork -- Tools -- Time --
  Historical Summary -- On Calculations of the Numbers for Wheels and
  Pinions; their Proportional Sizes, Trains, etc. -- Of Dial Wheels, or
  Motion Work -- Length of Time of Going without Winding up -- The Verge
  -- The Horizontal -- The Duplex -- The Lever -- The Chronometer --
  Repeating Watches -- Keyless Watches -- The Pendulum, or Spiral Spring
  -- Compensation -- Jewelling of Pivot Holes -- Clerkenwell --
  Fallacies of the Trade -- Incapacity of Workmen -- How to Choose and
  Use a Watch, etc.


_Spons’ Engineers’ and Contractors’ Illustrated Book of Prices of
Machines, Tools, Ironwork, and Contractors’ Material; and Engineers’
Directory._ Third edition, 4to, cloth, 6_s._


_Algebra Self-Taught._ By W. P. HIGGS, M.A., D.Sc., LL.D., Assoc. Inst.
C.E., Author of ‘A Handbook of the Differential Calculus,’ etc. Second
edition, crown 8vo, cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

  CONTENTS:

  Symbols and the Signs of Operation -- The Equation and the Unknown
  Quantity -- Positive and Negative Quantities -- Multiplication --
  Involution -- Exponents -- Negative Exponents -- Roots, and the Use of
  Exponents as Logarithms -- Logarithms -- Tables of Logarithms and
  Proportionate Parts -- Transformation of System of Logarithms --
  Common Uses of Common Logarithms -- Compound Multiplication and the
  Binomial Theorem -- Division, Fractions, and Ratio -- Continued
  Proportion -- The Series and the Summation of the Series -- Limit of
  Series -- Square and Cube Roots -- Equations -- List of Formulæ, etc.


  JUST PUBLISHED.

  In super-royal 8vo, 1168 pp., _with 2400 illustrations_, in 3
  Divisions, cloth, price 13_s._ 6_d._ each; or 1 vol., cloth, 2_l._; or
  half-morocco, 2_l._ 8_s._

  A SUPPLEMENT
  TO
  SPONS’ DICTIONARY OF ENGINEERING,
  Civil, Mechanical, Military, and Naval.
  EDITED BY ERNEST SPON, MEMB. SOC. ENGINEERS.

The success which has attended the publication of ‘SPONS’ DICTIONARY OF
ENGINEERING’ has encouraged the Publishers to use every effort tending
to keep the work up to the standard of existing professional knowledge.
As the Book has now been some years before the public without addition
or revision, there are many subjects of importance which, of necessity,
are either not included in its pages, or have been treated somewhat less
fully than their present importance demands. With the object, therefore,
of remedying these omissions, this Supplement is now being issued. Each
subject in it is treated in a thoroughly comprehensive way; but, of
course, without repeating the information already included in the body
of the work.

The new matter comprises articles upon

  Abacus, Counters, Speed Indicators, and Slide Rule.
  Agricultural Implements and Machinery.
  Air Compressors.
  Animal Charcoal Machinery.
  Antimony.
  Axles and Axle-boxes.
  Barn Machinery.
  Belts and Belting.
  Blasting.
  Boilers.
  Brakes.
  Brick Machinery.
  Bridges.
  Cages for Mines.
  Calculus, Differential and Integral.
  Canals.
  Carpentry.
  Cast Iron.
  Cement, Concrete, Limes, and Mortar.
  Chimney Shafts.
  Coal Cleansing and Washing.
  Coal Mining.
  Coal Cutting Machines.
  Coke Ovens.
  Copper.
  Docks.
  Drainage.
  Dredging Machinery.
  Dynamo--Electric and Magneto-Electric Machines.
  Dynamometers.
  Electrical Engineering, Telegraphy, Electric Lighting and its
  practical details, Telephones.
  Engines, Varieties of.
  Explosives.
  Fans.
  Founding, Moulding and the practical work of the Foundry.
  Gas, Manufacture of.
  Hammers, Steam and other Power.
  Heat.
  Horse Power.
  Hydraulics.
  Hydro-geology.
  Indicators.
  Iron.
  Lifts, Hoists, and Elevators.
  Lighthouses, Buoys, and Beacons.
  Machine Tools.
  Materials of Construction.
  Meters.
  Ores, Machinery and Processes employed to Dress.
  Piers.
  Pile Driving.
  Pneumatic Transmission.
  Pumps.
  Pyrometers.
  Road Locomotives.
  Rock Drills.
  Rolling Stock.
  Sanitary Engineering.
  Shafting.
  Steel.
  Steam Navvy.
  Stone Machinery.
  Tramways.
  Well Sinking.


  NOW COMPLETE.

  _With nearly 1500 illustrations_, in super-royal 8vo, in 5 Divisions,
  cloth.

  Divisions 1 to 4, 13_s._ 6_d._ each; Division 5, 17_s._ 6_d._; or 2
  vols., cloth, £3 10_s._

  SPONS’ ENCYCLOPÆDIA
  OF THE
  INDUSTRIAL ARTS, MANUFACTURES, AND COMMERCIAL
  PRODUCTS.

  EDITED BY C. G. WARNFORD LOCK, F.L.S.

  Among the more important of the subjects treated of, are the
  following:--

  Acids, 207 pp. 220 figs.
  Alcohol, 23 pp. 16 figs.
  Alcoholic Liquors, 13 pp.
  Alkalies, 89 pp. 78 figs.
  Alloys.
  Alum.
  Asphalt.
  Assaying.
  Beverages, 89 pp. 29 figs.
  Blacks.
  Bleaching Powder, 15 pp.
  Bleaching, 51 pp. 48 figs.
  Candles, 18 pp. 9 figs.
  Carbon Bisulphide.
  Celluloid, 9 pp.
  Cements.
  Clay.
  Coal-tar Products, 44 pp. 14 figs.
  Cocoa, 8 pp.
  Coffee, 32 pp. 13 figs.
  Cork, 8 pp. 17 figs.
  Cotton Manufactures, 62 pp. 57 figs.
  Drugs, 38 pp.
  Dyeing and Calico Printing, 28 pp. 9 figs.
  Dyestuffs, 16 pp.
  Electro-Metallurgy, 13 pp.
  Explosives, 22 pp. 33 figs.
  Feathers.
  Fibrous Substances, 92 pp. 79 figs.
  Floor-cloth, 16 pp. 21 figs.
  Food Preservation, 8 pp.
  Fruit, 8 pp.
  Fur, 5 pp.
  Gas, Coal, 8 pp.
  Gems.
  Glass, 45 pp. 77 figs.
  Graphite, 7 pp.
  Hair, 7 pp.
  Hair Manufactures.
  Hats, 26 pp. 26 figs.
  Honey.
  Hops.
  Horn.
  Ice, 10 pp. 14 figs.
  Indiarubber Manufactures, 23 pp. 17 figs.
  Ink, 17 pp.
  Ivory.
  Jute Manufactures, 11 pp., 11 figs.
  Knitted Fabrics--Hosiery,
  15 pp. 13 figs.
  Lace, 13 pp. 9 figs.
  Leather, 28 pp. 31 figs.
  Linen Manufactures, 16 pp. 6 figs.
  Manures, 21 pp. 30 figs.
  Matches, 17 pp. 38 figs.
  Mordants, 13 pp.
  Narcotics, 47 pp.
  Nuts, 10 pp.
  Oils and Fatty Substances, 125 pp.
  Paint.
  Paper, 26 pp. 23 figs.
  Paraffin, 8 pp. 6 figs.
  Pearl and Coral, 8 pp.
  Perfumes, 10 pp.
  Photography, 13 pp. 20 figs.
  Pigments, 9 pp. 6 figs.
  Pottery, 46 pp. 57 figs.
  Printing and Engraving, 20 pp. 8 figs.
  Rags.
  Resinous and Gummy Substances, 75 pp. 16 figs.
  Rope, 16 pp. 17 figs.
  Salt, 31 pp. 23 figs.
  Silk, 8 pp.
  Silk Manufactures, 9 pp. 11 figs.
  Skins, 5 pp.
  Small Wares, 4 pp.
  Soap and Glycerine, 39 pp. 45 figs.
  Spices, 16 pp.
  Sponge, 5 pp.
  Starch, 9 pp. 10 figs.
  Sugar, 155 pp. 134 figs.
  Sulphur.
  Tannin, 18 pp.
  Tea, 12 pp.
  Timber, 13 pp.
  Varnish, 15 pp.
  Vinegar, 5 pp.
  Wax, 5 pp.
  Wool, 2 pp.
  Woollen Manufactures, 58 pp. 39 figs.


  London: E. & F. N. SPON, 16, Charing Cross.
  New York: 44, Murray Street.




  Transcriber’s Notes


  Depending on the hard- and software used and their settings, not all
  elements may display as intended; some of the larger tables are best
  viewed on a wide screen in a wide window.

  Inconsistent spelling, hyphenation, lay-out and use of accents and
  thousands separators have been retained except as listed below.

  The (inconsistent) use of spaces, underscores, hyphens etc. to
  indicate blanks where names, data etc. need to be inserted has not
  been standardised.

  page 4, Dr. Ackland: possibly Henry Acland.

  page 137, 855 décicarcel-cubes: probably the decimal point is missing.

  page 372, Ranson’s: should possibly be Ransom’s (cf. Table of
  Contents) or vice versa.

  Index: not all items are given in alphabetical order, this has not
  been corrected.


  Changes made:

  Footnotes have been moved to the end of each chapter.
  Some obvious minor punctuation and typographical errors have been
  corrected silently.
  Vide has been standardised to _Vide_.
  Some tables have been re-arranged or split to fit the available space.
  page  xv: Leichenhauser changed to Leichenhaus
  page   1: c. 63 _s._ 37 changed to c. 63 s. 37
  page  14: closing quotes removed from after ... instructions thereon.
  page  16: opening quotes removed from before Syllabus of Subjects ...
  page  38: closing quote removed from after ... finished pavement.
  page  52: Ellisons changed to Ellison’s
  page  85, footnote [73]: Henry Allnut changed to Henry Allnutt
  page  93: 5 0 changed to 5·0
  page 137: décicarcel-tubes changed to décicarcel-cubes
  page 164: closing quote removed from after ... is broken up.
  page 184: nor exceeding changed to not exceeding
  page 233: depot changed to depôt as elsewhere
  page 247, footnote [172]: Beaumé changed to Baumé
  page 322: Oilantus changed to Ailantus
  page 334: (2.) added before _The slaughter-houses._
  page 357: footnote anchor [227] inserted
  page 368: LEICHENHAUSER changed to LEICHENHAUS
  page 371: closing quote added after ... ss. 120 and 121.
  page 379: closing quotes added after ... nor any name. and after ...
            one of their inspectors.
  catalogue page 11: Lord Lindsay changed to LORD LINDSAY as other
            authors
  catalogue page 15 and 16: several list items moved to new lines as the
            other list items.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Municipal and Sanitary Engineer's
Handbook, by H. Percy Boulnois

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MUNICIPAL AND SANITARY ***

***** This file should be named 55935-0.txt or 55935-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/9/3/55935/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Harry Lamé and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Peggy Finds the Theatre, by Virginia Hughes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Peggy Finds the Theatre
       Peggy Lane Theater Stories, #1

Author: Virginia Hughes

Illustrator: Sergio Leone

Release Date: November 11, 2017 [EBook #55933]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PEGGY FINDS THE THEATRE ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






[Illustration: _Randy was, as Peggy had suspected, a fine dancer_]

                       PEGGY LANE THEATER STORIES




                       _Peggy Finds the Theatre_


                           By VIRGINIA HUGHES

                      Illustrated by Sergio Leone


                    GROSSET & DUNLAP    _Publishers_
                                NEW YORK

                     © GROSSET & DUNLAP, INC., 1962
                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

              MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




                                CONTENTS


  1 Dramatic Dialogue                                                  1
  2 Dramatic Decision                                                  9
  3 In the Wings                                                      20
  4 Two Auditions                                                     33
  5 Starting a New Role                                               46
  6 Cast of Characters                                                57
  7 The Biggest Stage                                                 69
  8 First Act                                                         77
  9 Theater Party                                                     89
  10 Peggy Produces a Plot                                           102
  11 Rehearsals                                                      110
  12 Intermission                                                    119
  13 The Hidden City                                                 127
  14 The Hidden Theater                                              135
  15 The Stage Door                                                  145
  16 Understudies for Danger                                         154
  17 Backstage Fright                                                160
  18 Forecast—Fair!                                                  171




                        PEGGY FINDS THE THEATER




                                   I
                          _Dramatic Dialogue_


“Of course, this is no surprise to us,” Thomas Lane said to his daughter
Peggy, who perched tensely on the edge of a kitchen stool. “We could
hardly have helped knowing that you’ve wanted to be an actress since you
were out of your cradle. It’s just that decisions like this can’t be
made quickly.”

“But, Dad!” Peggy almost wailed. “You just finished saying yourself that
I’ve been thinking about this and wanting it for years! You can’t follow
that by calling it a quick decision!” She turned to her mother, her
hazel eyes flashing under a mass of dark chestnut curls. “Mother, you
understand, don’t you?”

Mrs. Lane smiled gently and placed her soft white hand on her daughter’s
lean brown one. “Of course I understand, Margaret, and so does your
father. We both want to do what’s best for you, not to stand in your
way. The only question is whether the time is right, or if you should
wait longer.”

“Wait! Mother—Dad—I’m years behind already! The theater is full of
beginners a year and even two years younger than I am, and girls of my
age have lots of acting credits already. Besides, what is there to wait
for?”

Peggy’s father put down his coffee cup and leaned back in the kitchen
chair until it tilted on two legs against the wall behind him. He took
his time before answering. When he finally spoke, his voice was warm and
slow.

“Peg, I don’t want to hold up your career. I don’t have any objections
to your wanting to act. I think—judging from the plays I’ve seen you in
at high school and college—that you have a real talent. But I thought
that if you would go on with college for three more years and get your
degree, you would gain so much worth-while knowledge that you’d use and
enjoy for the rest of your life—”

“But not acting knowledge!” Peggy cried.

“There’s more to life than that,” her father put in. “There’s history
and literature and foreign languages and mathematics and sciences and
music and art and philosophy and a lot more—all of them fascinating and
all important.”

“None of them is as fascinating as acting to me,” Peggy replied, “and
none of them is nearly as important to my life.”

Mrs. Lane nodded. “Of course, dear. I know just how you feel about it,”
she said. “I would have answered just the same way when I was your age,
except that for me it was singing instead of acting. But—” and here her
pleasant face betrayed a trace of sadness—“but I was never able to be a
singer. I guess I wasn’t quite good enough or else I didn’t really want
it hard enough—to go on with all the study and practice it needed.”

She paused and looked thoughtfully at her daughter’s intense expression,
then took a deep breath before going on.

“What you must realize, Margaret, is that you may not quite make the
grade. We think you’re wonderful, but the theater is full of young girls
whose parents thought they were the most talented things alive; girls
who won all kinds of applause in high-school and college plays; girls
who have everything except luck. You may be one of these girls, and if
you are, we want you to be prepared for it. We want you to have
something to fall back on, just in case you ever need it.”

Mr. Lane, seeing Peggy’s hurt look, was quick to step in with
reassurance. “We don’t think you’re going to fail, Peg. We have every
confidence in you and your talents. I don’t see how you could miss being
the biggest success ever—but I’m your father, not a Broadway critic or a
play producer, and I could be wrong. And if I am wrong, I don’t want you
to be hurt. All I ask is that you finish college and get a teacher’s
certificate so that you can always find useful work if you have to. Then
you can try your luck in the theater. Doesn’t that make sense?”

Peggy stared at the faded linoleum on the floor for a few moments before
answering. Then, looking first at her mother and then at her father, she
replied firmly, “No, it doesn’t! It might make sense if we were talking
about anything else but acting, but we’re not. If I’m ever going to try,
I’ll have a better chance now than I will in three years. But I can see
your point of view, Dad, and I’ll tell you what—I’ll make a bargain with
you.”

“What sort of bargain, Peg?” her father asked curiously.

“If you let me go to New York now, and if I can get into a good drama
school there, I’ll study and try to find acting jobs at the same time.
That way I’ll still be going to school and I’ll be giving myself a
chance. And if I’m not started in a career in one year, I’ll go back to
college and get my teacher’s certificate before I try the theater again.
How does that sound to you?”

“It sounds fair enough,” Tom Lane admitted, “but are you so confident
that you’ll see results in one year? After all, some of our top stars
worked many times that long before getting any recognition.”

“I don’t expect recognition in one year, Dad,” Peggy said. “I’m not that
conceited or that silly. All I hope is that I’ll be able to get a part
in that time, and maybe be able to make a living out of acting. And
that’s probably asking too much. If I have to, I’ll make a living at
something else, maybe working in an office or something, while I wait
for parts. What I want to prove in this year is that I can act. If I
can’t, I’ll come home.”

“It seems to me, Tom, that Margaret has a pretty good idea of what she’s
doing,” Mrs. Lane said. “She sounds sensible and practical. If she were
all starry-eyed and expected to see her name in lights in a few weeks,
I’d vote against her going, but I’m beginning to think that maybe she’s
right about this being the best time.”

“Oh, Mother!” Peggy shouted, jumping down from the stool and throwing
her arms about her mother’s neck. “I knew you’d understand! And you
understand too, don’t you, Dad?” she appealed.

Her father replied in little puffs as he drew on his pipe to get it
started. “I ... never said ... I didn’t ... understand you ... did I?”
His pipe satisfactorily sending up thick clouds of fragrant smoke, he
took it out of his mouth before continuing more evenly.

“Peg, your mother and I are cautious only because we love you so much
and want what’s going to make you happy. At the same time, we want to
spare you any unnecessary unhappiness along the way. Remember, I’m not a
complete stranger to show business. Before I came out here to Rockport
to edit the _Eagle_, I worked as a reporter on one of the best papers in
New York. I saw a lot ... I met a lot of actors and actresses ... and I
know how hard the city often was for them. But I don’t want to protect
you from life. That’s no good either. Just let me think about it a
little longer and let me talk to your mother some more.”

Mrs. Lane patted Peggy’s arm and said, “We won’t keep you in suspense
long, dear. Why don’t you go out for a walk for a while and let us go
over the situation quietly? We’ll decide before bedtime.”

Peggy nodded silently and walked to the kitchen door, where she paused
to say, “I’m just going out to the barn to see if Socks is all right for
the night. Then maybe I’ll go down to Jean’s for a while.”

As she stepped out into the soft summer dusk she turned to look back
just in time to see her mother throw her a comically exaggerated wink of
assurance. Feeling much better, Peggy shut the screen door behind her
and started for the barn.

Ever since she had been a little girl, the barn had been Peggy’s
favorite place to go to be by herself and think. Its musty but clean
scent of straw and horses and leather made her feel calm and alive.
Breathing in its odor gratefully, she walked into the half-dark to
Socks’s stall. As the little bay horse heard her coming, she stamped one
foot and softly whinnied a greeting. Peggy stopped first at the bag that
hung on the wall among the bridles and halters and took out a lump of
sugar as a present. Then, after stroking Socks’s silky nose, she held
out her palm with the sugar cube. Socks took it eagerly and pushed her
nose against Peggy’s hand in appreciation.

As Peggy mixed some oats and barley for her pet and checked to see that
there was enough straw in the stall, she thought about her life in
Rockport and the new life that she might soon be going to.

Rockport, Wisconsin, was a fine place, as pretty a small town as any
girl could ask to grow up in. And not too small, either, Peggy thought.
Its 16,500 people supported good schools, an excellent library, and two
good movie houses. What’s more, the Rockport Community College attracted
theater groups and concert artists, so that life in the town had always
been stimulating. And of course, all of this was in addition to the
usual growing-up pleasures of swimming and sailing, movie dates, and
formal dances—everything that a girl could want.

Peggy had lived all her life here, knew every tree-shaded street, every
country road, field, lake, and stream. All of her friends were here,
friends she had known since her earliest baby days. It would be hard to
leave them, she knew, but there was no doubt in her mind that she was
going to do so. If not now, then as soon as she possibly could.

It was not any dissatisfaction with her life, her friends, or her home
that made Peggy want to leave Rockport. She was not running away from
anything, she reminded herself; she was running _to_ something.

To what? To the bright lights, speeding taxis, glittering towers of a
make-believe movie-set New York? Would it really be like that? Or would
it be something different, something like the dreary side-street world
of failure and defeat that she had also seen in movies?

Seeing the image of herself hungry and tired, going from office to
office looking for a part in a play, Peggy suddenly laughed aloud and
brought herself back to reality, to the warm barn smell and the big,
soft-eyed gaze of Socks. She threw her arm around the smooth bay neck
and laid her face next to the horse’s cheek.

“Socks,” she murmured, “I need some of your horse sense if I’m going to
go out on my own! We’ll go for a fast run in the morning and see if some
fresh air won’t clear my silly mind!”

With a final pat, she left the stall and the barn behind, stepping out
into the deepening dusk. It was still too early to go back to the house
to see if her parents had reached a decision about her future. Fighting
down an impulse to rush right into the kitchen to see how they were
coming along, Peggy continued down the driveway and turned left on the
slate sidewalk past the front porch of her family’s old farmhouse and
down the street toward Jean Wilson’s house at the end of the block.

As she walked by her own home, she noticed with a familiar tug at her
heart how the lilac bushes on the front lawn broke up the light from the
windows behind them into a pattern of leafy lace. For a moment, or maybe
a little more, she wondered why she wanted to leave this. What for? What
could ever be better?




                                   II
                          _Dramatic Decision_


Upstairs at the Wilsons’, Peggy found Jean swathed in bath towels,
washing her long, straight red hair, which was now white with lather and
piled up in a high, soapy knot.

“You just washed it yesterday!” Peggy said. “Are you doing it again—or
still?”

Jean grinned, her eyes shut tight against the soapsuds. “Again, I’m
afraid,” she answered. “Maybe it’s a nervous habit!”

“It’s a wonder you’re not bald, with all the rubbing you give your
hair,” Peggy said with a laugh.

“Well, if I do go bald, at least it will be with a clean scalp!” Jean
answered with a humorous crinkle of her freckled nose. Taking a deep
breath and puffing out her cheeks comically, she plunged her head into
the basin and rinsed off the soap with a shampoo hose. When she came up
at last, dripping-wet hair was tightly plastered to the back of her
head.

“There!” she announced. “Don’t I look beautiful?”

After a brisk rubdown with one towel, Jean rolled another dry towel
around her head like an Indian turban. Then, having wrapped herself in
an ancient, tattered, plaid bathrobe, she led Peggy out of the steamy
room and into her cozy, if somewhat cluttered, bedroom. When they had
made themselves comfortable on the pillow-strewn daybeds, Jean came
straight to the point.

“So the grand debate is still going on, is it? When do you think they’ll
make up their minds?” she asked.

“How do you know they haven’t decided anything yet?” Peggy said, in a
puzzled tone.

“Oh, that didn’t take much deduction, my dear Watson,” Jean laughed. “If
they had decided against the New York trip, your face would be as long
as Socks’s nose, and it’s not half that long. And if the answer was yes,
I wouldn’t have to wait to hear about it! You would have been flying
around the room and talking a mile a minute. So I figured that nothing
was decided yet.”

“You know, if I were as smart as you,” Peggy said thoughtfully, “I would
have figured out a way to convince Mother and Dad by now.”

“Oh, don’t feel bad about being dumb,” Jean said in mock tones of
comfort. “If I were as pretty and talented as you are, I wouldn’t need
brains, either!” With a hoot of laughter, she rolled quickly aside on
the couch to avoid the pillow that Peggy threw at her.

A short, breathless pillow fight followed, leaving the girls limp with
laughter and with Jean having to retie her towel turban. From her new
position, flat on the floor, Peggy looked up at her friend with a rueful
smile.

“You know, I sometimes think that we haven’t grown up at all!” she said.
“I can hardly blame my parents for thinking twice—and a lot more—before
treating me like an adult.”

“Nonsense!” Jean replied firmly. “Your parents know a lot better than to
confuse being stuffy with being grown-up and responsible. And, besides,
I know that they’re not the least bit worried about your being able to
take care of yourself. I heard them talking with my folks last night,
and they haven’t got a doubt in the world about you. But they know how
hard it can be to get a start as an actress, and they want to be sure
that you have a profession in case you don’t get a break in show
business.”

“I know,” Peggy answered. “We had a long talk about it this evening
after dinner.” Then she told her friend about the conversation and her
proposed “bargain” with her parents.

“They both seemed to think it was fair,” she concluded, “and when I went
out, they were talking it over. They promised me an answer by bedtime,
and I’m over here waiting until the jury comes in with its decision. You
know,” she said suddenly, sitting up on the floor and crossing her legs
under her, “I bet they wouldn’t hesitate a minute if you would only
change your mind and decide to come with me and try it too!”

After a moment’s thoughtful silence, Jean answered slowly, “No, Peg.
I’ve thought this all out before, and I know it would be as wrong for me
as it is right for you. I know we had a lot of fun in the dramatic
groups, and I guess I was pretty good as a comedienne in a couple of the
plays, but I know I haven’t got the real professional thing—and I know
that you have. In fact, the only professional talent I think I do have
for the theater is the ability to recognize talent when I see it—and to
recognize that it’s not there when it isn’t!”

“But, Jean,” Peggy protested, “you can handle comedy and character lines
as well as anyone I know!”

Jean nodded, accepting the compliment and seeming at the same time to
brush it off. “That doesn’t matter. You know even better than I that
there’s a lot more to being an actress—a successful one—than reading
lines well. There’s the ability to make the audience sit up and notice
you the minute you walk on, whether you have lines or not. And that’s
something you can’t learn; you either have it, or you don’t. It’s like
being double-jointed. I can make an audience laugh when I have good
lines, but you can make them look at you and respond to you and be with
you all the way, even with bad lines. That’s why you’re going to go to
New York and be an actress. And that’s why I’m not.”

“But, Jean—” Peggy began.

“No buts!” Jean cut in. “We’ve talked about this enough before, and I’m
not going to change my mind. I’m as sure about what I want as you are
about what you want. I’m going to finish college and get my certificate
as an English teacher.”

“And what about acting? Can you get it out of your mind as easily as all
that?” Peggy asked.

“That’s the dark and devious part of my plan,” Jean answered with a
mysterious laugh that ended in a comic witch’s cackle and an
unconvincing witch-look that was completely out of place on her round,
freckled face. “Once I get into a high school as an English teacher, I’m
going to try to teach a special course in the literature of the theater
and maybe another one in stagecraft. I’m going to work with the
high-school drama group and put on plays. That way, I’ll be in a spot
where I can use my special talent of recognizing talent. And that way,”
she added, becoming much more serious, “I have a chance really to do
something for the theater. If I can help and encourage one or two people
with real talent like yours, then I’ll feel that I’ve really done
something worth while.”

Peggy nodded silently, not trusting herself to speak for fear of saying
something foolishly sentimental, or even of crying. Her friend’s
earnestness about the importance of her work and her faith in Peggy’s
talent had touched her more than she could say.

The silence lasted what seemed a terribly long time, until Jean broke it
by suddenly jumping up and flinging a last pillow which she had been
hiding behind her back. Running out of the bedroom, she called, “Come
on! I’ll race you down to the kitchen for cocoa! By the time we’re
finished, it’ll be about time for your big Hour of Decision scene!”


It was nearly ten o’clock when Peggy finally felt that her parents had
had enough time to talk things out. Leaving the Wilson house, she walked
slowly despite her eagerness, trying in all fairness to give her mother
and father every minute she could. Reaching her home, she cut across the
lawn behind the lilac bushes, to the steps up to the broad porch that
fronted the house. As she climbed the steps, she heard her father’s
voice raised a little above its normal soft, deep tone, but she could
not make out the words.

Crossing the porch, she caught sight of him through the window. He was
speaking on the telephone, and now she caught his words.

“Fine. Yes.... Yes—I think we can. Very well, day after tomorrow, then.
That’s right—all three of us. And, May—it’ll be good to see you again,
after all these years! Good-by.”

As Peggy entered the room, her father put down the phone and turned to
Mrs. Lane. “Well, Betty,” he said, “it’s all set.”

“What’s all set, Dad?” Peggy said, breaking into a run to her father’s
side.

“Everything’s all set, Peg,” her father said with a grin. “And it’s set
just the way you wanted it! There’s not a man in the world who can hold
out against two determined women.” He leaned back against the fireplace
mantel, waiting for the explosion he felt sure was to follow his
announcement. But Peggy just stood, hardly moving a muscle. Then she
walked carefully, as if she were on the deck of a rolling ship, to the
big easy chair and slowly sat down.

“Well, for goodness’ sake!” her mother cried. “Where’s the enthusiasm?”

Peggy swallowed hard before answering. When her voice came, it sounded
strange, about two tones higher than usual. “I ... I’m trying to be
sedate ... and poised ... and very grown-up,” she said. “But it’s not
easy. All I want to do is to—” and she jumped out of the chair—“to yell
_whoopee_!” She yelled at the top of her lungs.

After the kisses, the hugs, and the first excitement, Peggy and her
parents adjourned to the kitchen, the favorite household conference
room, for cookies and milk and more talk.

“Now, tell me, Dad,” Peggy asked, her mouth full of oatmeal cookies, no
longer “sedate” or “poised,” but her natural, bubbling self. “Who was
that on the phone, and where are the three of us going, and what’s all
set?”

“One thing at a time,” her father said. “To begin with, we decided
almost as soon as you left that we were going to let you go to New York
to try a year’s experience in the theater. But then we had to decide
just where you would live, and where you should study, and how much
money you would need, and a whole lot of other things. So I called New
York to talk to an old friend of mine who I felt would be able to give
us some help. Her name is May Berriman, and she’s spent all her life in
the theater. In fact, she was a very successful actress. Now she’s been
retired for some years, but I thought she might give us some good
advice.”

“And did she?” Peggy asked.

“We were luckier than I would have thought possible,” Mrs. Lane put in.
“It seems that May bought a big, old-fashioned town house and converted
it into a rooming house especially for young actresses. She always
wanted a house of her own with a garden in back, but felt it was foolish
for a woman living alone. This way, she can afford to run a big place
and at the same time not be alone. And best of all, she says she has a
room that you can have!”

“Oh, Mother! It sounds wonderful!” Peggy exulted. “I’ll be with other
girls my own age who are actresses, and living with an experienced
actress! I’ll bet she can teach me loads!”

“I’m sure she can,” her father said. “And so can the New York Dramatic
Academy.”

“Dad!” Peggy shouted, almost choking on a cooky. “Don’t tell me you’ve
managed to get me accepted there! That’s the best dramatic school in the
country! How—?”

“Don’t get too excited, Peg,” Mr. Lane interrupted. “You’re not accepted
anywhere yet, but May Berriman told me that the Academy is the best
place to study acting, and she said she would set up an audition for you
in two days. The term starts in a couple of weeks, so there isn’t much
time to lose.”

“Two days! Do you mean we’ll be going to New York day after tomorrow,
just like that?”

“Oh, no,” her mother answered calmly. “We’re going to New York tomorrow
on the first plane that we can get seats on. Your father doesn’t believe
in wasting time, once his mind is made up.”

“Tomorrow?” Peggy repeated, almost unable to believe what she had heard.
“What are we sitting here talking for, then? I’ve got a million things
to do! I’ve got to get packed ... I’ve got to think of what to read for
the audition! I can study on the plane, I guess, but ... oh! I’ll be
terrible in a reading unless I can have more time! Oh, Mother, what
parts will I do? Where’s the Shakespeare? Where’s—”

“Whoa!” Mr. Lane said, catching Peggy’s arm to prevent her from rushing
out of the kitchen. “Not now, young lady! We’ll pack in the morning,
talk about what you should read, and take an afternoon plane to New
York. But tonight, you’d better think of nothing more than getting to
bed. This is going to be a busy time for all of us.”

Reluctantly, Peggy agreed, recognizing the sense of what her father
said. She finished her milk and cookies, kissed her parents good night
and went upstairs to bed.

But it was one thing to go to bed and another to go to sleep.

Peggy lay on her back, staring at the ceiling and the patterns of light
and shade cast by the street lamp outside as it shone through the leaves
of the big maple tree. As she watched the shifting shadows, she reviewed
the roles she had played since her first time in a high-school play.
Which should she refresh herself on? Which ones would she do best? And
which ones were most suited to her now? She recognized that she had
grown and developed past some of the roles which had once seemed
perfectly suited to her talent and her appearance. But both had changed.
She was certainly not a mature actress yet, from any point of view, but
neither was she a schoolgirl. Her trim figure was well formed; her face
had lost the undefined, simple cuteness of the early teens, and had
gained character. She didn’t think she should read a young romantic part
like Juliet. Not that she couldn’t do it, but perhaps something sharper
was called for.

Perhaps Viola in _Twelfth Night_? Or perhaps not Shakespeare at all.
Maybe the people at the Academy would think she was too arty or too
pretentious? Maybe she should do something dramatic and full of stormy
emotion, like Blanche in _A Streetcar Named Desire_? Or, better for her
development and age, a light, brittle, comedy role...?

Nothing seemed quite right. Peggy’s thoughts shifted with the shadows
overhead. All the plays she had ever seen or read or acted in melted
together in a blur, until the characters from one seemed to be talking
with the characters from another and moving about in an enormous set
made of pieces from two or three different plays. More actors kept
coming on in a fantastic assortment of costumes until the stage was
full. Then the stage lights dimmed, the actors joined hands across the
stage to bow, the curtain slowly descended, the lights went out—and
Peggy was fast asleep.




                                  III
                             _In the Wings_


When Peggy awoke in the early-morning sunshine that slanted into her
room, it was not yet six o’clock. She reached over to shut off the alarm
so that it would not ring at seven, the time she had decided to get up
for her big day.

“People say that actors live in a dream world,” Peggy thought with a
smile. “Maybe that’s why I seem to want so little sleep. I get enough of
dreams when I’m supposed to be wide awake!”

Recognizing that it would be useless to try to doze off again, she
quickly slipped out of bed and quietly set about her morning routine of
washing and dressing. The extra time gained by her early awakening would
give her an opportunity to select her reading for the Academy, Peggy
told herself as she stepped into the shower. But first things first;
before she could think about the reading she would need a clear mind,
and that meant that all the many details of packing and dressing must be
taken care of. As she wrapped herself in an oversized bath towel, Peggy
was already mentally choosing her clothes.

An hour and a half later, when Mr. and Mrs. Lane came downstairs for
breakfast, they discovered Peggy, dressed and ready for the trip,
sitting surrounded by books at the big desk in the “library” end of the
living room. Her suitcase stood fully packed in the front hall, a large
traveling purse leaning next to it like a puppy sleeping by its mother.

“My goodness!” Mrs. Lane said. “What did you do, stay up all night? Why,
you’re ready to board the plane this very minute!”

“Not quite, Mother,” Peggy answered with a smile. “I still haven’t
settled on what to read tomorrow, and I want to do that before I go.
Otherwise I’ll be carting so many books with me to New York that we’ll
have to pay a fortune in extra-baggage charges!”

“Oh, I’m not worried about you,” her mother said. “You’ll have your mind
made up and your part memorized before we even leave, if I remember the
way you go at things! Now you can just put the books away until after
breakfast, because I’m going to need some help in the kitchen.”

As Peggy stood up, her mother looked approvingly at the costume she had
chosen for the flight. It was a smart beige suit with a short jacket
that was well cut to accent Peggy’s trim figure, and its tawny color was
the perfect complement for her even summer tan and her dark chestnut
hair. A simple pearl choker and a pair of tiny pearl earrings provided
just the right amount of contrast.

“Is it all right?” Peggy asked. Noting her mother’s admiring nod, she
added, “I packed my gray silk suit and two dresses—the green print and
the blue dress-up, in case we go someplace. I mean someplace dressy, for
dinner or something. And I have the right shoes packed, too, and
stockings and blouses and toothbrush and everything,” she added,
anticipating her mother’s questions.

Mrs. Lane smiled and sighed. “Well, I suppose there’s no use my
pretending that you’re not all grown up and able to take care of
yourself! You pass inspection with flying colors! Now, let’s get that
jacket off and get an apron on—we have some work to do!”

Peggy and her mother went into the kitchen to prepare what Mr. Lane
always called his “traveling breakfast,” a huge repast of wheat cakes,
eggs, sausages and coffee, with plenty of orange juice to start, maple
syrup to soak the wheat cakes in, and more coffee to finish up on. While
breakfast was cooking, Mr. Lane was on the phone, confirming their plane
reservations and, when this was done, arranging for hotel rooms in New
York. The last phone call was finished barely a minute before the first
steaming stack of wheat cakes was set on the kitchen table.

“Well,” he said, sitting down to look with satisfaction at his plate,
“everything’s under control. We leave at two this afternoon, which
should have us in New York by five. That gives us plenty of time. We’ll
leave the house about one.”

“Plenty of time!” Peggy wailed. “What about my reading? I’ve got to get
started right away!” She gave a fairly convincing performance of someone
who must get started right away, except for the fact that she showed not
the least sign of moving until she had finished her breakfast.

During the meal, the talk was all of reservations, changing planes at
Chicago, what kind of rooms they would have at the hotel, and all the
many little details of a trip, but Peggy hardly heard. She was still
sorting out plays and roles in her mind and trying to make a decision.

By the second cup of coffee, her decision was made. “I’ve got it!” she
announced in triumph and relief. “I’ll prepare three short readings
instead of one long one! That’ll give them a chance to see the kinds of
things I can do, and if I’m bad in one, I’ll have two more chances!”

“Makes sense,” her father agreed. “What three parts do you think you’ll
try?”

“I’m not completely sure,” Peggy said, “but at least I know what kinds
of parts they’ll be, and that will make the job easier. One of them will
surely be Viola in _Twelfth Night_ because I’ve done it, and I’ve always
felt that it was me, and besides, it’s Shakespeare, and I think I ought
to have one Shakespeare anyway.”

“That’s a good choice,” Mrs. Lane said. “Now I think you’d better pick
out one that’s more dramatic and another that’s something of a comedy or
a character part, don’t you?”

“Exactly what I had in mind,” Peggy answered. “It shouldn’t be too hard
to select, now that I know what I’m looking for.”

But it wasn’t easy, either. Peggy spent the whole morning carefully
looking over her collection of play scripts. Every time she thought she
had the right role, she found there was no single scene that seemed to
be right for a short reading. There was no trouble over Viola, because
Shakespeare always wrote good scenes and speeches, and because there was
no need to sketch in what had led up to the scene in the play, since
everyone was sure to be perfectly familiar with it. But everything else
seemed to be a problem. It was not until her parents were all packed and
there was only half an hour before leaving, that she finally made up her
mind.

For the comedy reading, she determined to do Sabina in the first scene
of _Skin of our Teeth_, which had much more to it than simple comedy.
The business of Sabina’s stepping out of character to talk directly to
the audience as a disgusted actress criticizing the play and its author
gave added dimension to the reading. For her dramatic role, Peggy chose
the part of Miriamne in the last scene of _Winterset_, a hauntingly
beautiful tragedy. She selected this, she explained to her parents as
they drove to the airport, because it was one of the few dramatic,
poetic parts written for a girl of her own age, and she felt that she
could identify with the character. Then, book in hand, she started to
study.

[Illustration: _They waited for the passenger call_]

Peggy continued to read all through the arrival at the airport, the
business of checking in and loading baggage. They waited for the
passenger call, then walked up the steps into the plane. When she was
settled in her seat by the window, she lowered her book and turned,
wide-eyed, to her mother.

“Do you know,” she said in slow, awed tones, “that this is my first time
on an airplane, and I’m just sitting here reading?” She closed the book
on her lap. “That’s just going to wait for a while, until I see what’s
going on!”

Looking out the oval window, she saw the steep steps being wheeled away
from the plane. A red fuel truck drove under the wing and sped across
the wide concrete runway. Then the plane’s engines whirled, coughed once
and started, and the plane lumbered down the runway slowly. Reaching the
end, it deliberately turned, stopped for a moment, then suddenly
gathered up strength, leaped forward and sped into the wind. Peggy
watched, fascinated, as the ground dropped away and the shadow of wings
below grew smaller and smaller as the plane rose. She watched until the
tiny farms, winding ribbons of highway, and gleaming rivers disappeared
beneath a puffy layer of cloud. Then she looked back to her mother.

“Well,” she said, “it looks as if my new career is off to a flying
start! Now I’d better study these plays, or I’m in for an unhappy
landing.”

Reluctantly tearing her eyes from the fantastic cloud formations that
floated past, Peggy once more opened her book and was soon deep into the
even more fantastic world of Thornton Wilder’s _Skin of Our Teeth_.

The quick flight to Chicago, the change of planes, the landing and
take-off, scarcely attracted her notice, and the three hours flew by at
faster than air speed. Peggy had finished reading and marking Sabina’s
role, and was deep into Miriamne’s when her mother interrupted her.

“They want us to fasten our seat belts again,” she said. “We’re coming
into New York now.”

This time Peggy noticed! Spread below her, stretching out as if it would
never end, was the maze of streets and avenues, rivers and islands,
towers and bridges, that was the city of New York. The late afternoon
sun touched the windows of skyscrapers with fire, gilded the steelwork
of the bridges, cast deep, black shadows into the streets and over the
rooftops of low buildings. Giant liners stood tied at docks; others
steamed sedately up or down the river, pushed or pulled by tiny tugs.
Even from their soaring height above the scene, New York refused to look
small or toylike. It stubbornly looked only like the thing it was—the
busiest, tallest, most exciting city in the world!

Turning in a great, slow arc, the plane descended until it was skimming
only a few feet above the waters of a broad bay. Peggy wondered if they
had flown in on a seaplane, and if they were to land in the water and
have to take a boat to shore, but even as the thought occurred to her,
the rocky shoreline suddenly appeared beneath her, and the plane swiftly
settled down on the long, concrete runway of New York’s LaGuardia
Airport.

It was the rush hour, and parkways and streets were jammed with
homebound cars, but their cab driver knew his way around back streets,
and turned and twisted around one corner after another until Peggy lost
all sense of direction. Her father, though, seemed to know exactly where
they were at all times, and kept pointing out buildings and parks and
bridges to Peggy and her mother, telling the name of each and how it
figured in his memory. People, trucks, cars, buses, cabs, motor scooters
and little foreign autos filled the streets. Mr. Lane called out the
names of famous avenues as they came to and crossed them: Park Avenue
... Madison Avenue ... Fifth Avenue....

The taxi passed by store after store, their windows like so many stage
sets. By the edge of Central Park, they drew up in front of their hotel.
Bewildered, excited, dazzled, delighted, Peggy stepped out of the taxi
and stood for the first time on the sidewalks of New York!


The temptation had been strong to give in to all the glamour of the
city, to go for dinner in one of the famous restaurants, to ride in a
hansom cab through Central Park behind a plodding old horse, to race
through the bright streets and gather in all the excitement of New York
in one whirling evening. The temptation had been strong, but Peggy had
bravely fought it off. She had work to do before her tryout the next day
at the New York Dramatic Academy.

After a fine but hurried dinner in the hotel’s handsome, formal dining
room, Peggy and her parents went upstairs to work on her readings. She
read first the passage she had marked out from _Twelfth Night_, since
Viola was a familiar role for her and she needed only a short time to
work on it. The speech she selected was the best known in the play, and
for that reason it was probably the hardest to do, for everyone who
would hear it would have his own idea of how it should sound. Any actor
knows how hard it is to put new life into old, familiar words, and Peggy
was well aware of this. Still, because this short speech gave her a
chance, in only a dozen lines, to indicate the whole character of Viola,
she thought it was worth the risk.

Viola, pretending to be a boy, tells the Duke Orsino of a sister she
never had, and by so doing, confesses her own love for the Duke. The
first difficulty of the speech lay in making Viola seem both a boy and a
lovesick girl at the same time. The second difficulty was to make the
imaginary sister of the speech seem like a real person.

Mr. Lane began, reading the Duke’s lines, in which he says that no woman
can love as deeply as a man. When the speech was done, Peggy spoke,
sounding at first completely feminine, “Ay, but I know—” She broke off
the phrase in well-acted confusion, as Viola quickly realizes that she
has spoken as a woman, rather than as the boy she is supposed to be.

“What dost thou know?”

“Too well what love women to men may owe,” Peggy answered firmly, saying
the line with boyish confidence. Then she went on, in a confidential,
man-to-man tone: “In faith, they are as true of heart as we./My father
had a daughter loved a man,/As it might be, perhaps were I a woman,/I
should your lordship.”

“And what’s her history?” Mr. Lane said.

Now Peggy subtly shifted the character, and when she replied, after a
short pause, it was not in the manner of either the lovesick girl or the
confident, manly boy. Now she spoke dreamily, a story-teller, a poet, as
Viola fell into her own pretended character, half-believing in the
“sister” she had created.

“A blank, my lord. She never told her love,/But let concealment, like a
worm i’ the bud,/Feed on her damask cheek. She pined in thought,/And
with a green and yellow melancholy/She sat, like Patience on a
monument,/Smiling at grief—”

She was interrupted by a round of applause from both her parents, and
responded with a start, suddenly realizing that she was in a hotel room,
not in the court of the Duke Orsino or even on a stage.

“But there’s more to the speech!” she said. “You shouldn’t have
applauded yet!”

“Couldn’t help it, Peg,” her father said. “Besides, I’m afraid that if
you work on that any more, you might ruin it. As far as I’m concerned,
it’s perfect just the way it is. You can do the whole speech tomorrow.”

“Oh, you’re just being a loving father,” Peggy answered, in pleased
confusion, but she knew that there was more to his comments and
compliments than this. She remembered how, during the weeks when she
first struggled to breathe life into the character of Viola, her father
had read lines with her and criticized sharply every time she did
something not quite true to the role. Remembering this, her pleasure now
was doubled. Even so, Peggy insisted on reading the whole speech, then
doing it several times over, before she would go on to her next marked
reading.

Sabina, in _Skin of Our Teeth_, was a complete change of pace. Peggy
worked on the satirical, comic, sometimes silly-sounding lines for two
hours before she felt she was ready to go on. Then, two more hours went
swiftly by as she developed the poetic, passionate lines of Maxwell
Anderson’s Winterset, working on Miriamne’s death scene.

When at last she was satisfied, it was a little after midnight, and
Peggy felt exhausted, as if she herself had died with Miriamne.

“I should have done Sabina last,” she said. “Maybe I wouldn’t feel so
much as if I had just been murdered after three acts of blank verse!”

“On the other hand,” Mrs. Lane said, “you might not have been so ready
for sleep as you are now, and sleep is what you need most, if you’re
going to do as well in the morning as you did tonight.”

“That’s right,” added Peggy’s father. “We have just time for eight good
hours of rest and a decent breakfast tomorrow before you go to keep your
ten-o’clock date with destiny. Let’s go.”

Peggy didn’t argue. She kissed her parents, went to her own adjoining
bedroom and, in three minutes, was curled up between the crisp, fresh
sheets. Tonight she was too tired to think about the excitement to come.
She had barely settled her head on the pillow before she was deep in a
dreamless sleep.




                                   IV
                            _Two Auditions_


Peggy hadn’t really known what to expect of the New York Dramatic
Academy, but whatever it was, it wasn’t this!

The Academy was housed on two floors of an ancient office building only
a few blocks away from their hotel. On either side of a tall door that
led into a long, dim hallway was an assorted collection of name plates,
telling passers-by what to expect inside. One somewhat blackened brass
plaque, about a foot square, gave the name of the Academy. Other
plaques, some brass, some plastic, some polished and others almost
illegible, announced that the building also provided offices for a
dentist, studios for two ballet schools and a voice teacher, and the
workshop of a noted costume designer. Other trades represented included
theatrical agents, song writers, an export-import company, an
advertising agency, and a custom bootmaker specializing in ballet
footwear.

At the end of the hall, two old elevators wheezed and grunted their way
up and down in grillwork shafts. Over the ornate elevator doors were
indicators telling on what floors the elevators were. Neither of them
worked. But, when one car landed with a sigh of relief and its gates
slid open with a creak, Peggy found that the operator was, surprisingly,
a young man, quite good-looking and smartly uniformed. He greeted her
courteously and took her to the top floor with the air of a man who was
giving her a lift in his own chauffeured limousine.

The minute Peggy looked around her, any misgivings she had about the
building vanished. The atmosphere was ageless, shabby, and completely
theatrical. The elusive smell, both indefinable and familiar, but which
was nothing but the smell of backstage, perfumed the hall. Through a
closed door to her left, Peggy heard a chorus reciting in unison some
lines from a Greek play she could not identify. Directly in front,
through an open door in a wall of doors, Peggy saw a tiny theater of
perhaps one hundred seats. A few people lounged in the front seats while
on the bare stage, under a single floodlight, two young men acted out
what sounded like a violent quarrel. To the right, where the long
hallway was crossed by another hall, a boy appeared, swinging a fencing
foil. He turned the corner out of sight.

“This must be where I go,” Peggy thought, starting for a nearby door
marked OFFICE. She took a deep breath, opened the door, and walked in.

The pretty receptionist, greeting her by name, said that she was
expected and that Mr. Macaulay, the director of the Academy, would see
her right away.

The first thing that Peggy noticed was the office, in the elaborate
clutter of which Mr. Macaulay seemed to have disappeared. It was a
large, square room, its walls paneled from the Oriental rugs to the
high, carved ceiling. Two tall windows draped in red velvet showed
glimpses of rooftops and river through lace curtains. Every available
piece of wall was covered with pictures: photographs of people who were
surely actors and actresses, paintings of people and of places, heavily
framed etchings, newspaper clippings, book jackets, theater programs,
old theater posters, magazine articles and, apparently, everything else
that could possibly fit into a frame. Where there were not pictures,
there were books, except for one narrow wall space between the windows,
where there was a small marble fireplace, over the mantel of which rose
a tall mirror. The mantel itself was a jumble of pipes, tobacco tins,
more pictures in small frames, china figurines, candlesticks and boxes
assembled around a pendulum clock which stood motionless under a
bell-shaped glass cover.

In one corner of the room was a heavily carved black grand piano,
covered with a fringed cloth and stacked high with ragged piles of sheet
music, play scripts, books, more pipes, more pictures.

In the opposite corner stood an immense desk, also heavily carved, and
behind its incredibly cluttered surface rose the tall back of a
thronelike chair. In the chair, almost lost from view, sat Mr. Macaulay.

When Peggy first realized he was there, she almost laughed, thinking of
various animals whose protective coloration lets them melt into their
natural backgrounds, the way the dappled coat of a deer seems merely
more of the forest pattern of light and shade.

Mr. Macaulay was as ornate as his room. He was a small, round man who
concealed a cherubic smile beneath a pair of curly, white handlebar
mustaches. His red cheeks and white hair made the perfect setting for
bright blue eyes that glittered behind an old-fashioned pair of
pince-nez glasses perched precariously on his nose. A black ribbon from
the eyeglasses ended in a gold fitting secured in his lapel. The round
expanse of his shirt front was covered by a brocaded, double-breasted
vest such as Peggy had never seen except in movies set in the Gay
Nineties, and when Mr. Macaulay rose in smiling greeting and came around
the end of the desk, Peggy could not help looking down to see if he wore
gray spats. He did.

“Welcome!” Mr. Macaulay boomed in a surprising bass voice. “Now let’s
sit down and talk this over.” He motioned Peggy to sit on one of a pair
of straight-backed chairs, while he stood by the other with one foot up
on its petit-point seat.

“Now,” he said abruptly, “what makes you think you can act?”

Taken aback, Peggy stammered a little. “Well ... well, I’ve been in a
lot of plays in college and high school and ... and I always got good
reviews ... I mean, everybody always thought that I was....”

“Won’t do.” Mr. Macaulay cut in decisively. “You’re telling me why other
people think you can act. What I want to know is why _you_ think you can
act.”

This time, Peggy answered with more control. “I don’t really think I
can, Mr. Macaulay,” she said calmly and earnestly, “even though I did
get those good notices. But I know that I want to, and I hope that I can
learn here.”

“A good answer!” the little director thundered happily. “Now tell me
_why_ you want to act, and how you _know_ it’s what you really want to
do, and we’ll be well on the way to a lasting friendship.”

Peggy thought for a minute before answering. She sensed that her answer
would be important in deciding whether she would be accepted as a member
of the Academy or not, and she wanted to be sure that the words were a
true reflection of what she wanted to say.

“Mr. Macaulay, I want to act for the same reason that I grew up in
Rockport, Wisconsin. It just happened. I didn’t choose it; it chose me.
And I know it’s what I really want because when I’m acting, I feel about
one hundred per cent more alive than when I’m not—and it’s a wonderful
feeling.”

Mr. Macaulay nodded solemnly, removed his foot from the chair and walked
twice around the room in silence, neatly dodging the chairs and tables
that filled the place. As he seemed to be starting a third circuit of
the room, he stopped, turned and replaced his foot on the chair.

“Young lady,” the little director said softly, “if you’re any more alive
on the stage than you are right here in this room, you’ll light up the
audience like an arc lamp!”

Then he strode rapidly to the door, opened it, and turned to smile
warmly at Peggy. “It’s been a pleasure meeting you,” he said.

“But, Mr. Macaulay,” Peggy said, “won’t you even give me a chance to
read for you? I’ve got three short selections prepared, and—”

“Not for at least six months,” the director cut in. “I never hear
readings from beginners.”

“Six months? Then I can’t start this term!” Peggy said, almost in tears.

“Of course you’ll start this term,” Mr. Macaulay said. “We begin in two
weeks. Miss Carson will give you all the necessary forms and the
catalogue and anything else you need. Glad to have you with us!”

“But ... but ...” Peggy sputtered. “You mean I’m accepted? Without even
reading for you? Just like that?”

“Just like that,” Mr. Macaulay agreed calmly. “I don’t believe in
readings. What I look for is personality and presence and a feeling for
the stage. The right kind of feeling for the stage,” he added. “As for
the readings, I’ll be glad to hear you after you’ve had about six months
of work with the Academy. I can tell you’ll be one of our good ones.”

With a few words of farewell to the confused Peggy, he led her to Miss
Carson’s desk and quickly retreated to what Peggy already thought of as
his “natural habitat.”


Only after she was through with Miss Carson and her papers and forms and
was on the way down in the ancient elevator did it finally dawn on Peggy
that she had actually gotten what she had wanted for years—she was
accepted in the best dramatic school in New York! The elevator seemed
hardly big enough to hold her; she wanted to run, to jump, to sing! What
she was actually doing seemed the silliest thing imaginable. She was
grinning a wide, foolish grin and at the same time tasting the salty
tears that were probably smearing her mascara.

“Congratulations,” said the elevator operator. “Not everyone makes it.”

“Oh! How did you know?” Peggy gasped, dabbing at her eyes with her
handkerchief.

“Knew you were trying when I saw you come up with the play scripts,” he
answered. “And I knew you made it when I saw your face.” He slid back
the squealing grillwork gate. “So long,” he said. “See you in a couple
of weeks.”

At the end of the long hall, the doorway filled with sunshine seemed to
be paved with gold. Outside, it seemed to Peggy, the whole city was
paved with gold. She impulsively ran to the door, poised in the
sunlight, and blew a theatrical kiss at the sky.

When Peggy, bubbling with her news, returned to the hotel, it was
decided to fill the time before lunch with a necessary shopping tour.
She needed so much, now that she was to live in New York. Mr. Lane
decided to let Peggy and her mother take care of this aspect of the
trip, while he visited some old newspaper friends. He arranged to meet
them for lunch at the hotel in two hours, kissed them fondly, and
boarded a bus downtown.

Rockport was never like this, Peggy thought, as she and her mother
walked along looking in shop windows. They were so excited just deciding
which stores to shop in and what things she needed, that before they had
a chance to actually buy anything, it was time for lunch.

“At least we had a chance to find out where all the nice stores are,”
Mrs. Lane said. “And it doesn’t matter that we didn’t get you your
things. You’ll probably have more fun going shopping by yourself or with
some of your new friends when you come back here to live. Besides, we
won’t have to bring things home and then carry them all the way back to
New York again.”

Peggy agreed that it made sense, and at the thought of her “new friends”
and of buying her own things in New York’s world-famous stores, she got
a little thrill of pleasure and anticipation.

After lunch, made memorable by Mr. Lane’s new collection of newspaper
stories picked up from his old friends, it was time to travel downtown
to meet May Berriman and see where Peggy would be living.

As their taxi took them downtown from the hotel, Peggy noticed how the
city seemed to change character every few blocks. The types of buildings
and the kinds of stores changed; the neighborhood grew progressively
more shabby; there were more trucks in the streets and fewer taxis.
Peggy wondered what sort of neighborhood May Berriman’s place was in.
Mrs. Lane, too, looked a bit concerned and whispered to Mr. Lane, “Are
you sure we’re going the right way?”

He nodded and said, “You don’t know New York. Wait and see.”

In the middle of what appeared to be a district of warehouses and office
buildings, the cab turned a corner, and a swift change again overtook
the city. Suddenly there were well-kept apartment houses and residential
hotels and then, with another turn, it was as if time itself had been
turned back!

The street ended in a beautiful old-fashioned park surrounded by a high
wrought-iron fence in which were set tall gates. The street around the
park was lined with old, mellow brick mansions whose steps led up to
high doors fitted with gleaming brass knobs, knockers, and hinges. Peggy
almost expected to see top-hatted gentlemen emerge from them to descend,
swinging slim canes, to waiting carriages.

“This is Gramercy Park,” her father said. “It’s still one of the most
fashionable and beautiful parts of the city. May’s house is just off the
park, and she tells me she has park rights for herself and the girls who
live with her.”

“Park rights?” Peggy said wonderingly. “Do you mean it’s a private
park?”

“That’s right,” her father answered. “One of the last in New York. Its
use is limited to people who live right around it, all of whom have keys
to the gates. That’s one thing that makes this such a nice place to
live.”

The cab had made almost a complete circle of the park when the driver
turned off into a side street. Two doors down he stopped before a
handsome brownstone house, complete with the steep steps and brass
fittings that were typical of the area. On either side of the steps, at
street level, stood a square stone column, and on each one was a
polished brass plate engraved: Gramercy Arms.

As Peggy started up the steps she caught a glimpse through the windows
in the little areaway below street level. The spacious kitchen she saw
looked far more typical of Rockport than anything she would have
expected to find in New York City, and it made her feel sure that she
would like living in May Berriman’s house.

May Berriman herself proved to be as big and as warm looking and as
countrified as her kitchen. Her erect carriage and bright-red hair
belied her more than sixty years, and her voice was deep and even, with
none of the quaver that Peggy was used to hearing in older people. She
met them at the door with vast and impartial enthusiasm, kissed them all
and ushered them into a tiny sitting room, tastefully furnished with a
mixture of modern and antique pieces. They had scarcely had time to say
hello when tea was served by a bright-eyed, kimonoed Japanese woman who
might have been any age at all. Peggy watched in silent pleasure as May
Berriman poured the tea in the formal English style, using an essence,
fresh boiled water, an alcohol burner to keep the tea hot, and an
assortment of tongs, spoons, and strainers. It was not until each of
them had a fragile cup of hot, fragrant tea and a plate of delicate
little sandwiches that May Berriman sat back, relaxed, for conversation.

“Peggy, your father told me on the phone that you have been accepted in
the Academy. I’m delighted. Now tell me, what do you think of Archer
Macaulay?”

“I hardly know,” Peggy admitted. “I’ve never met anyone like him. Is he
always as abrupt as that?”

“Always!” May Berriman laughed. “Ever since I’ve known Archie—and that
goes back a good many years—he’s tried to act like a bad playwright’s
idea of an Early Victorian theatrical genius. It’s a peculiar sort of
act when you first see it, but after a while you get used to it and
hardly notice at all. Besides, it’s not all sham. He may not be Early
Victorian, but he is a theatrical genius.”

“Was he an actor?” Peggy asked.

“Goodness, no! Only in his personal life! There’s a world of difference
between acting and teaching; you hardly ever find anyone who’s good at
both. Macaulay’s a magnificent teacher, so he had sense enough never
even to try acting.”

“But,” Peggy objected, “how can you teach something you can’t do?”

May Berriman smiled. “Oh, Archie can do, all right. He’s that rarest of
all talents—a talented audience. He knows when something is good and
when it isn’t, and if it’s not good, he knows just what it lacks. He
just keeps asking for what he wants, and when he gets it—if he gets
it—it turns out to be just what everyone else wants, too. That’s why he
has been able to discover and develop more fine talent than any other
man of our time. You’re a lucky girl to be able to work with Archer
Macaulay. Even to be accepted for his school is a great honor.”

Peggy nodded in understanding as May Berriman talked about the talent
for recognizing talent, remembering her last conversation with her
friend Jean Wilson. Maybe some day, Peggy thought, she herself, an old
retired actress, would be serving tea in her own house, and talking in
just such tones of affection and admiration for her friend Jean, who
would then be the famous director of the best dramatic school in....

She was brought out of her daydream by her mother, who touched her arm
gently and said, “Back to earth, dear. Mrs. Berriman wants to show us
the room you’re to have.”

The room was small, but comfortably furnished as a sitting room, with a
large couch that opened to a bed. Two tall windows with window seats set
in their deep frames looked out into the tops of two lacy trees that
rose from a tiny, well-kept garden. An easy chair and a low table stood
in front of a little fireplace that really worked—a rare thing in New
York. An antique desk between the windows and a large bureau opposite
the fireplace completed the furnishings. The couch was covered in a deep
blue that matched the blue carpet, the walls were white, and the windows
were draped in a white fabric with blue cabbage roses. The same fabric
covered the easy chair.

“It’s perfect!” Peggy said, and rushed off to try the big easy chair.
“I’m going to love it here!” she said. “In fact, I hardly want to go
home!”

“I’m afraid, Peg,” Mr. Lane said, looking at his watch, “that that’s
just what we’re going to have to do, and in a very few minutes. If we
want to make our plane, we’d better be getting back to the hotel to
pack.”

The brief good-by, the taxi ride around Gramercy Park and back uptown,
the hurried packing, the trip to the airport and the now-familiar
process of boarding and take-off seemed to Peggy as fast, as jerky and
peculiar as a movie run backward. She wanted to play it back right
again, to put everything in its proper sequence, and live over her
exciting day.

And that’s exactly what she did, in her mind’s eye, all the way back to
Rockport.




                                   V
                         _Starting a New Role_


Rockport had never looked so little as it did from the air. The plane
circled the town at dusk, just as the stewardess finished serving
supper, and as Peggy looked down from the oval window next to her seat,
she saw the street lights suddenly flick on, section by section, all
over the town. The familiar streets glowed under their canopies of
trees, the houses were almost hidden under other trees and, in the
center of the town, a few neon lights added warmth and color.

Peggy hardly knew what she felt for the place where she had been born
and where she had lived her whole life. A wave of tenderness came over
her for Rockport, so small and homelike, surrounded by its farms and
forests and lakes. And at the same time, she compared this view from the
air with the sight of New York, towering and dramatic in the afternoon
sunshine. Who could settle for Rockport, after breathing the excitement
of the giant city? Still ... she wondered if New York could ever be to
her the home that Rockport was.

The somewhat bumpy runway of Armory Field was under their wheels. Peggy
was home again. But in her mind, she was still in the city, starting her
new and wonderful life.

After quickly unpacking and changing to a skirt and blouse more suitable
to Rockport than the smart traveling suit she had worn on the plane,
Peggy came running downstairs. Her father sat in his easy chair reading
the two issues of the _Eagle_ that had come out in his absence. Her
mother sat in the wing chair opposite, working serenely on her needle
point. To look at them, Peggy thought, one would suppose that they had
never left home, that nothing at all had changed from what it had been
two days ago.

“I’m going out for a while,” she announced. “I’ve just got to tell Jean
right away, or I’ll burst for sure!”

“All right, dear,” Mrs. Lane said. “But don’t stay out too late. You’ve
had an exciting day, and you’re going to need some sleep.”

With a wave of her hand, Peggy left and, whistling boyishly, skipped
down the front steps. Once on the street, the last of her grown-up
reserve left her, and she ran all the way to the Wilson house to arrive,
panting and breathlessly bright-eyed, a few moments later.

“Jean’s down at the Sweet Shop,” Mrs. Wilson said, “but I know she’ll
want to see you. I’ll call and tell her not to leave, and you can meet
her there.”

Peggy thanked Mrs. Wilson briefly, and ran back home once more to
collect her bike. As she pedaled down Chestnut Street, she wondered how
many more times she would ride her bike again. It was not the sort of
thing one did in New York, obviously. And besides, the bike was a part
of her childhood and early teens, and now she was coming out of them and
off to the great adventure of becoming a woman! Thinking this, she
slowed down a little, so as to enjoy the ride and the familiar sights
around her. Growing up would happen soon enough, she now knew.
Meanwhile, she wanted to slowly taste and enjoy the pleasures of
small-town girlhood that were not to come again.

Her subdued mood lasted only until she arrived at the Sweet Shop. There
she found Jean, Betty Dugan, Alice Schultz, and Millie Pratt crowded
around a soda-laden table, laughing and talking. They managed to make
room for one more chair and as soon as Peggy was seated, turned silent,
expectant faces to her.

Looking from face to face, Peggy suddenly laughed. “You look like a
nestful of baby birds waiting to be fed!”

Then she told her friends the whole story of her trip, starting, of
course, with the main fact that she had been accepted at Mr. Macaulay’s
famous New York Dramatic Academy. Describing him, she acted him out for
them, and soon had the girls in fits of laughter. Then she went on to
tell about May Berriman, the room she would live in, the quaint
old-fashioned neighborhood around Gramercy Park, the private park and
all the rest. When she had finished, she said to Jean, “Doesn’t it make
you want to change your mind? I do wish you’d come, too. It’s going to
be wonderful, but with you there, it would be absolutely perfect!”

Jean shook her head ruefully. “I must admit it sounds tempting,” she
said, “but I stand on what I told you before about what I want to do. I
don’t think I’m an actress at all, and if I tried to be one, I’d
probably only fail. And that wouldn’t make me happy at all. If I do what
I plan to, though, I’ll probably succeed, and that way I’ll have a happy
life.”

Peggy nodded her agreement. “I guess I was only testing you, in a way,”
she admitted, “just to see if you really meant it. Now that I know you
do, I’m sure that you’re absolutely right.”

Then she told her friend about the discussion she had had with May
Berriman about Mr. Macaulay, and what the older woman had told Peggy
about his great ability as a teacher and his lack of ability as an
actor.

“She said, too, that the ability to recognize talent and to develop it
is a lot rarer than the talent itself. And all the time she was talking,
I was thinking about you and our last talk together.”

“Well, that makes me feel a lot better,” Jean admitted. “It’s good to
know that there are other people—real professionals—who think about
things the same way I do. Thanks for telling me.”

Then the talk turned to other things besides the theater: clothes, boys,
the coming school year at Rockport Community College, for which Peggy
would not be there—all the hundreds of things that girls talk about.
Before Peggy realized it, it was ten-thirty, and she was beginning to
yawn.

“It’s not the company,” she said, “it’s the hour. Not exactly original,
but perfectly true. I’m afraid I’d better be getting home.”

The others agreed that it was their bedtime too, and they trooped out to
the bicycle rack to say their good nights. Peggy and Jean rode side by
side slowly down the leafy street, feeling the first slight chill that
announced the end of summer was at hand.

“When will you be leaving?” Jean asked.

“I guess in about a week,” Peggy said. “The term starts in two weeks,
and I want to get settled in New York before school begins, so that I
can have my mind all clear for work. I think I’ll need a week just to
get really comfortable in my room, do the shopping I’ll have to do, and
find my way around the city. I want to know about buses and subways and
things like that before I get started.”

“That sounds like a good idea to me,” Jean replied. “What I would do if
I were you is to get a street map of the city, and a guidebook, and
spend some time just wandering around so you get the idea of where
things are.”

“That’s just what I plan to do,” Peggy said. “In fact, my father
suggested the same thing. He said that I should go on a few guided
tours, too. They have buses that take tourists all around the city and
show them everything of interest. Dad says that native New Yorkers, and
people who are trying to make other people think that they’re native New
Yorkers, are ashamed to be seen on the sight-seeing buses, which seems
pretty silly to me. The result is that people who come from out of town
often know more about New York than the people who have grown up there!”

Both girls laughed at the idea, then Peggy continued, “I plan to spend
at least a week taking tours, and walking around the streets with a
guidebook, and shopping. I’d better leave next week, I guess.”

“It seems so soon,” Jean said a little sadly. “I’m going to miss you.”

“It is soon,” Peggy admitted, “but I’d rather be rushed than have to
wait for a month and think about nothing but the day I’m going to leave.
Even as it is, there’ll be too much time for good-bys, and I hate saying
good-by. Especially to people I care for.”

The girls rode the rest of the way in silence, each thinking her own
thoughts about their long association which was now to come to an end.
They came to Peggy’s house first and stopped their bikes.

Then Peggy said, “Of course I’ll write,” as if she were answering a
question that Jean had asked.

Jean laughed, “You’re right! That’s just what I was thinking! I wonder
how long it’ll be before either of us finds another person we can do
that with again?”

“I don’t suppose we ever will,” Peggy said. “And it’s probably just as
well. There’s something a little weird about it!”

Then, on common impulse, they recited in chorus the witches’ lines from
_Macbeth_, only changing the “three” to “two.”

“When shall we two meet again? In thunder, lightning, or in rain?”

And with laughter and witchlike cackles, they said good night.


The next week flew by in a continual round of farewells, packing,
endless talk in the Sweet Shop about acting and the life Peggy would be
leading in New York and, the night before her departure, a big farewell
party at Jean’s house. It was a tired Peggy, glad to be on her way at
last, who found herself once more at the airport with her parents. But
this time, she was to fly alone.

“Are you sure you packed everything?” her mother asked for perhaps the
tenth time.

“Positive,” Peggy assured her.

“And you know how to get from the airport to Gramercy Park?” her father
asked, also for perhaps the tenth time.

“I’ll never forget!” Peggy laughed.

“Well...” Mrs. Lane said.

“Well...” Mr. Lane said.

They stood, all three, looking at one another, not knowing what to say.
Then Peggy’s mother, with more than a faint suspicion of tears in her
eyes, threw her arms about her daughter and kissed her.

“Oh dear!” she said. “You’d better get on that plane right away, or I am
going to be silly and cry!”

Peggy kissed both her parents and started through the gate across the
concrete strip where the big plane waited. As she turned to wave
good-by, her mother called, “Are you sure you have—”

“Yes!” Peggy shouted back. “I’m sure!”

“And don’t forget to phone the minute you get there!” her father called,
his last words drowned out by the sound of a plane that swooped low
overhead.

At the top of the boarding steps, Peggy waved again for the last time,
then went in to her seat to start her first flight alone—a flight that
would bring her to all she had ever hoped for.


It was dark when the plane arrived in New York this time, and if Peggy
had thought the sight breathtaking when she first saw it, she was
absolutely stunned by this!

In every direction, as far as she could see, the streets stretched out
like blazing strings of lights, white, red, blue, green, with sudden
bursts and knots of brighter light where major streets joined. As the
plane banked and turned, she saw a superhighway winding along the edge
of a bay, interrupted by complicated cloverleafs, underpasses and
overpasses. The lights on the highway were diamond-blue, and the road
was dotted with headlights and taillights of thousands of cars like
fireflies in the night.

Then the turning of the plane revealed midtown Manhattan, tall and
sparkling! The Empire State Building towered over all, its four bright
beams sweeping the sky over the city. The UN building stood out like a
solid slab of brilliance against the rest of the skyline. Beyond it,
Times Square blazed like a bonfire.

All around her in the plane, Peggy saw the rest of the passengers,
including obviously experienced travelers, pressed against the windows,
enchanted by the fairy-tale sight below. They were all talking,
pointing, comparing notes on the beauty of this or that.

The plane swept lower now, and the skyline seemed to rise and grow even
more mighty. Over the East River, the bridges were spider-webs and
pearls; small boats like water bugs skimmed under them and out again.
Then, abruptly, a new and closer brilliance of searchlights and whirling
red and green signals—and the plane settled smoothly into the bustle and
roar of LaGuardia Airport.

Peggy was glad that she had been there before with her parents, or she
might never have found her way out. Crowds of people swarmed about the
place, sweeping past in every direction. Piles of luggage and groups of
waiting travelers seemed to block her way no matter where she turned.
Ignoring the crowds as best she could, and following her sense of
direction and her memory of where she had gone the previous week, Peggy
worked her way to the front of the terminal where the taxi stand was. A
bank of phone booths reminded her to call home before going on. Then she
hailed a cab and gave the driver the address of the Gramercy Arms.

She had planned to take the airport bus to the terminal in Manhattan and
a cab from there, but she had changed her mind. This one extravagance,
Peggy felt, would be worth the price. Settling back in comfort, she
opened the window to a cool rush of air and became absorbed in the
passing sights of parkways, streets, bridges and, finally, the entrance
over the giant Triborough Bridge into the enchanted isle of Manhattan.

“Your first trip to New York?” the taxi driver asked, noticing her
fascination with the sights.

“No,” Peggy answered, feeling herself quite the experienced traveler. “I
was here last week. But that was the first time,” she confessed.

“Staying long?”

“Forever, I hope!” Peggy replied. “I’m going to live here.”

The East River Drive went into a sort of tunnel, supported on one side
by pillars, through which Peggy could see a string of barges slowly
forging upstream.

“You know what’s above us?” the driver asked. “No? It’s a park! That’s
right. This road is built under a park!”

Farther on, after they had come out of the tunnel, they plunged into
another one. “Another park?” Peggy asked.

“Nope. This time it’s an apartment house!”

The third time the road went underground, it was the UN building that
was above them. What a fantastic city! Peggy thought. Everything seemed
topsy-turvy. The idea of driving under parks, apartment houses and giant
office buildings was so queer! She said as much to the driver, who only
laughed. “Miss, you’ll get used to all sorts of queer things if you live
here! I’ve been driving a cab in this town for twenty-four years now,
and I haven’t seen the end of odd things. As fast as you can see one,
they build two more!”

When they arrived at the Gramercy Arms, the driver leaped out and helped
her with her bags up the steep front steps. She didn’t know then how
unusual it was for a cab driver to help with luggage. He was being
really gallant.

“Good luck,” he said, on leaving. “You’ll need it. It’s not an easy town
to get started in, but young girls like you come here every day to try,
and most of them make it somehow. Just don’t let it scare you. It’s big,
but it’s not unfriendly. And there’s no place else in this world that
I’d rather live!” With a wave of farewell, he climbed into his cab and
rode off around the corner.

Peggy took a deep breath, patted her hair, and rang the bell of her new
home.




                                   VI
                          _Cast of Characters_


The door was opened, not by Mrs. Berriman, but by a small, dark-haired
girl with huge, black eyes and a gamin grin, who greeted her with a
decided French accent.

“Allo, allo!” she said brightly. “Come een! Are you Amee or Peggee?”

“I—I’m Peggy,” Peggy said, somewhat taken aback.

“Good!” the French girl cried. “You don’t look like an Amee! I’m Gaby,
wheech ees short for Gabrielle. I leeve ’ere. Maman Berriman she ees out
shopping, mais les autres girls sont ici. Pardon. I meex too much French
een with my talk. Parlez-vous Français?”

“Un peu,” Peggy said. “A very little peu, I’m afraid. But I understood
you. You said the other girls are here, right?”

“Parfait!” Gaby grinned. “Maybee I can teach you how to speak, if you
would like that?”

“I would,” Peggy agreed enthusiastically, but added quickly, “not
starting right now, though!”

“Okay,” Gaby shrugged. “Come on! I first introduce you.”

Four girls waited in the large, comfortable living room, all looking
expectantly at the door. As Peggy entered, a pert-faced redhead bounced
out of her chair to say hello.

“I’m Dot,” she announced. “Are you Peggy or Amy?”

“Peggee, of course!” Gaby cut in, before Peggy could answer. “Does she
look like an Amee to you?”

“No, I guess she doesn’t,” Dot said reflectively. “Well, welcome!”

“Thank you,” Peggy said. “Now will somebody tell me who Amy is?”

“Let me introduce you first,” Dot answered, taking Peggy by the arm.
“This is Irene, our household beauty queen,” she said. Irene, a tall,
startlingly beautiful brunette, languidly waved a gesture of welcome
with long, perfectly manicured fingers. Smiling, she said, “Don’t mind
her jealous tones, Peggy. They say that beauty is in the eye of the
beholder, and that means that she must love me, or she’d think I was
ugly.”

A pretty, round-faced girl with almost white blond hair done in a long
single braid came over to Peggy.

“They sound very catty,” she said with a gentle smile, “but we think
they wouldn’t know what to do without each other. Now, no fighting
tonight,” she said to Dot and Irene. “We want to give Peggy a chance to
get used to us first.” Then, turning back to Peggy, she said, “My name
is Greta. Your room is right next door to mine. And this is Maggie.”

Maggie, all freckles, brown bangs, and bright China-blue eyes, was
sitting cross-legged on the floor. Without uncrossing her legs, she rose
effortlessly, offered a wiry handshake and a warm grin, and sank back to
her former position in one fluid movement.

“She’s not showing off,” Dot said, noticing Peggy’s startled look. “She
does that sort of thing all the time without even thinking about it.
She’s a dancer, and she makes the rest of us seem like a herd of
elephants by comparison.”

“Not elephants,” Maggie said. “Not since I’ve been teaching you all how
to move and walk. Maybe buffalo, but not elephants!”

“Do you know ’ow to move and walk?” Gaby asked.

“I always thought so, but now I’m beginning to have my doubts,” Peggy
replied.

“Walk to the door and then back,” Maggie said.

Peggy did so, trying to be as graceful as she could, without seeming in
any way affected. She had never really considered her walking ability
before, and now that she was doing so, under the close scrutiny of the
five girls, she suddenly felt that she had never walked before. Coming
back to Maggie, she waited hopefully for her judgment. “Elephant?” she
asked.

“Nope,” Maggie said, as if trying to find just the right kind of beast.

“Buffalo?”

“A little better than buffalo, I think. Maybe a well-bred cart horse.
But don’t feel bad about it. You haven’t had lessons yet. Now, we can
start by—”

“We can start by sitting down and getting to know each other first,”
Greta interrupted. “Come on, Peggy. You must be really confused by all
this.”

“A little,” Peggy admitted. “It seems that everyone wants to teach me
something. I was hardly in the house when Gaby was offering French
lessons! What do you teach?”

“I try to teach good manners to my crazy friends here,” Greta said with
a laugh, “but I don’t seem to be very good at it!”

When Peggy was established in a comfortable chair, with the other girls
around her, the first thing she asked was, “Now, who is Amy?”

“Amy Shelby Preston is all we know about her,” Dot said, “just as Peggy
Lane is all we know about you. That, and the fact that you were both due
to get here tonight.”

“Good!” Peggy said. “Then I won’t be the only new girl in the place!
That ought to make it a little easier on me, and on all of you.”

“Oh, you’re not a new girl any more!” Irene laughed. “You’re only new
around here for the first five minutes, and you’ve been here nearly ten
by now! If Amy Shelby Preston takes another half hour to get here,
you’ll be an old-timer by then!”

“Oui, that ees so!” Gaby put in. “Everybodee here ees so open—they tell
you everytheeng about themselves so très vite—that means veree fast—that
you know them so like old friends in no time, yes?”

Peggy thought that this was a fine idea, and she said so. Then, in
accordance with what she now knew to be the household custom, she told
the five girls as much about herself as she felt would be interesting to
them: where she was from, why she was in New York—a five-minute
autobiography.

“... so, you see,” she finished, “I wanted to study acting and I felt
that this was the only place to go, so here I am.”

“It’s pretty much the same with us,” Dot said. “None of us is from New
York either, and we all came to be in the theater or some part of it.
I’m a comedienne and eccentric dancer, and I sing a little, too. I’m not
going to any school but I still work with a voice coach and a drama
coaching group. I’m from California originally. I was in a few movies,
but not in any good roles. I’m not a movie type. I came here when I got
a chance to do a television series that originated live from New York,
and when the series ended, I stuck around. I’m in a Broadway musical
now, lost in the chorus. It’s not much, but it pays the rent.”

“She’s too modest,” Greta said. “She’s not just in the chorus. She has a
dance specialty and a few lines, and she’s understudying the lead
comedienne. And she’s good at it, too.”

Dot blushed and said roughly, “For goodness’ sake, don’t be nice to me!
It makes me feel I have to be nice to you, and that’s not my character!”

Greta answered promptly, “All right, then, let’s talk about me! Anyone
who doesn’t want stage center isn’t going to get it!” She stood up,
walked to the center of the room and made a small pirouette, her thick
braid whirling around her. “I am Greta Larsen and I come from Boston,”
she recited in a little-girl voice. “I know I have a face like a Swedish
dumpling, and everybody thinks I should have come from there or at least
from Wisconsin like you. If you come from Boston, you’re supposed to be
Irish. I’m an ingénue and I’ve been in four off-Broadway plays and one
Broadway play, and all of them were flops. Right now I’m working as a
script editor for a TV producer, and trying to make him realize that I’m
an actress. So far he hardly realizes I’m a script editor. He thinks I’m
a hey-you.” With a comic bow like a mechanical doll, she sat down to a
round of laughter and applause.

“Who’s next?” Peggy said, still laughing. “I haven’t had such fun in
ages!”

Gaby, who stood up next, threw the girls into gales of laughter by
announcing first that she was French. Then she went on to tell Peggy
that her full name was Gabrielle Odette Francine DuChamps Goulet, but
that she only used the name Gaby Odette. Her mother was dead and her
father worked for the UN in New York, but spent most of his time
traveling about the world, only returning for a few weeks at a time.
Gaby had studied acting in France, and had even attracted some critical
attention and good personal reviews in her one acting part in Paris, but
when her father came to America, she decided to come with him and make a
new start here. Since her arrival about a year ago, she had been
devoting all of her energy to studying English, and hoped that in
another six months or so she would be good enough to start looking for
parts.

“I guess I’m next,” Irene said, stretching her long, well-shaped legs
and leaning back in her chair. “I’m Irene Marshall, and I’m—” But just
then the doorbell rang, interrupting her.

“That must be Amy,” she said. “Now I don’t have to tell my history
twice.”

She strode to the door to let the new arrival in, and in a few seconds
ushered her into the living room.

“This is Amy Preston,” she announced, “and this,” she continued, waving
a hand at the five girls in the living room, “is a room full of girls.
Come on in and meet them.”

Peggy thought that Amy Preston was just about the prettiest girl she had
ever seen, and as she watched her gracefully shaking hands and saying
hello, she felt sure that they would be friends. Amy’s honey-blond hair
framed a small oval face, large brown eyes and a smiling, self-possessed
expression. When she spoke, it was with a soft, pleasant Southern accent
and a low voice. Irene introduced Amy to Peggy last of all, and Peggy
said, “I’m really glad to have you here. I’m new too. I just came in
about a half hour ago, and I was so relieved to know that I wasn’t going
to be the only new girl.”

“It makes me feel heaps better too,” Amy said. “In fact, as much as I’ve
been looking forward to New York, I’ve been half dreading this first
meeting. I may not look it, but I’m really quite shy.”

“And I was just thinking how well you handled yourself during all these
introductions!” Peggy said.

“Oh, you have to do that if you’re shy,” Amy said. “That way, people
never know about it. It’s the same thing as going on the stage, I guess.
They say that the best actresses and actors are always just nearly
paralyzed with stage fright. In fact, I think that’s what adds the extra
excitement to their presence. At least I hope so!”

“Did you come to New York to act, too?” Peggy asked.

“I hope to, if I’m lucky,” Amy replied. “But first off, I came to
study.”

“So did I,” Peggy said. “Where are you studying?”

“The New York Academy,” Amy answered, with a faintly perceptible touch
of pride.

“Why, so am I!” Peggy cried with delight.

The two of them quickly fell into an animated discussion of the Academy
and of Mr. Macaulay. They were just comparing notes on their interviews
with him when Dot gently but firmly interrupted.

“You girls will have a lot of time for all that, but now it’s time to do
all the introductions. Amy, you tell us about you, and then we’ll go on
about us. Gaby and Greta and Peggy and I have told about us already, so
we won’t repeat it now. We’ll catch you tomorrow. So there’s only you
and Irene and Maggie to go.”

Then she explained about the household method of introduction, which Amy
agreed was a fine idea.

Amy’s speech was short and direct. “I’m Amy Preston, and I come from
Pine Hollow, North Carolina, which nobody ever heard of except the
people who live there. I went to college for a year and acted in four
plays, and then I persuaded my parents to let me come to New York to
act. There’s nothing else to tell about me, except that I think I’m the
luckiest girl I ever knew to find a place like this to live in and a
place like the Academy to study at. I know I’m going to like you all,
and I hope you’re going to like me, too.” Blushing slightly, she sat
down, and Peggy noticed that her hands were trembling a little. She
hadn’t been fooling about the shyness and stage fright then, Peggy
thought, but she was certainly able to keep it from showing, unless you
looked very closely. Peggy was sure that Amy would prove to be a good
actress.

The rest of the introductory speeches went swiftly. Irene, it turned
out, was from Cleveland. Her real name was Irma Matysko, but she
thought, and everybody agreed, that Irene Marshall sounded a lot better
for a would-be actress. She had acted in several television dramas in
minor parts, and was supporting herself mostly as a fashion model.

Maggie, the dancer, spoke next. “I’m Maggie Delahanty,” she began, “and
I was actually born in Ireland, only my parents brought me here when I
was two, so I don’t remember anything about it. I was raised in
Philadelphia, where my father is a bus driver, and I’ve been dancing
since I was three. I’ve worked in musicals on Broadway and on the road,
and I’ve worked in night clubs, which I hate. Right now I’m studying
singing with a fine coach, so that I can get some good work, because
there’s nothing much for a dancer who can’t sing. I just got back last
week from a summer tour with a music circus, in which I danced my way
through ten states in as many weeks. Right now, I don’t know what I’m
going to do, except sit down as much as I can.”

With another one of her uncanny, fluid movements, she sat down.

The general introductions done, Peggy and Amy went back to their
conversation about Mr. Macaulay and the Academy. Amy’s experience in her
interview had been much the same as Peggy’s. She too had prepared
material to read and, like Peggy, had thought at first that she was
rejected when Mr. Macaulay wouldn’t let her read it. Now she could
hardly wait to get started.

Irene, who had heard all about Mr. Macaulay and his brusque approach
before she had tried to get into the Academy a year ago, said that she
knew she hadn’t made the grade the minute he had started being kind to
her.

“Why did he reject you?” Peggy asked.

“He said that a girl as pretty as me didn’t need acting lessons,” Irene
said with a laugh. “He said that even if I learned to be a good actress,
I would never have a chance to prove it, because I would be given the
kind of parts that just need looks. I told him that I wanted to be a
good actress as well as a pretty one and he told me that it would be a
tragic mistake, because there aren’t any parts written for people like
that!” She laughed again, then in a more sober tone, added, “I think he
was just being kind to me and trying to make me feel good. And you know
what? He succeeded!”

As the conversation turned to plays and roles and types of actresses,
the other girls joined in. They had just gotten to a spirited and
somewhat noisy discussion of the ability of a well-known actress, when
May Berriman came in.

“Well, Amy and Peggy!” she said. “I see you’ve met everybody and you’re
right at home! Good! Now let me make you feel even more at home by
acting like a mother. Do you girls know that it’s very late? And do you
know that I’ve been busy making hot chocolate for you? And that it’s
waiting in the kitchen right now, getting cool? Well, now you know, so
get moving!”

The seven girls and May Berriman trooped downstairs to the big, homey
kitchen that Peggy had noticed on her first visit. Full of friendly
people and the smell of hot chocolate and homemade cookies, the kitchen
seemed to Peggy the nicest place she had ever been. Seated in antique
painted chairs around the long sawbuck table with May Berriman at its
head, they passed around cookies and chocolate and continued the
discussion of the prominent actress, carefully taking her apart, gesture
by gesture, until it seemed a wonder that she had ever gotten so much as
a walk-on role.

“It’s all very easy to criticize your elders and betters,” May Berriman
finally said, “but it’s quite another thing to stand up on the stage
with them and act on their level! That’s not to say that I disapprove of
discussions like this. I think they’re good, because they do develop
your critical abilities, but I think they can be carried too far.” With
a glance at the clock, she added, “And I think this one has gone far
enough into the night. Now all of you, get up to bed. Peggy and Amy
haven’t even unpacked yet!”




                                  VII
                          _The Biggest Stage_


There were no meals served at May Berriman’s Gramercy Arms, but the big
kitchen was considered common property, and anyone who wanted to was
allowed to prepare breakfast and dinner there. Lunches were eaten at
restaurants and counters.

Each of the girls had a wire basket labeled and filled with her own food
in the giant hotel-size refrigerator, and each was given shelf space for
other things. Since Peggy and Amy had not stocked up the night before,
the other girls invited them to share breakfast with them.

“We have a system,” Dot said. “Each of us cooks for all the others in
turn, but that’s only for breakfast. At dinnertime, you shift for
yourself. The dishes are done for us, thank Heaven, by Aniko, the
housemaid. We each contribute to a dishwashing fund every week to keep
Aniko happy. Since you’re both new, we’ll put you at the end of the
list, which gives you about a week to get used to us in the morning,
before having to cook for us.”

“She’s being optimistic,” Maggie called over her shoulder from her
position at the range. “It’s impossible to get used to us in the
morning. How do you like your eggs?”

They settled on scrambled, which was diplomatic, since they noticed that
Maggie was whipping up a bowl of them for the others. In short order,
they were seated around the long table, eagerly eating the eggs, bacon,
toast and fresh sliced tomatoes, and washing it down with good, hot
coffee.

Irene and Greta huddled together, looking over a copy of _Variety_ and
writing in small notebooks. Catching Peggy’s inquiring glance, Irene
explained, “It’s _Variety_, the bible of show business. We’re looking at
the casting notes. Every time a producer has a play and wants to see new
actors, he puts a notice in the casting call page. The notices tell you
what kind of people he’s looking for and when he’ll see them. We’re
looking—along with a thousand other actors—to see if there’s something
for us. I’ve got two that sound interesting, and Greta’s got one.”

“And do you just go up and say, ‘Here I am’?” Amy asked.

“That’s about all I do,” Irene admitted with a laugh, “because I just
answer the ads for Showgirl types and beautiful ingénue roles. I just
stand there and hope they like my face and figure.”

“I don’t see how they couldn’t,” Peggy said.

“Oh, it’s easy! I’m too tall for some, and too fashionable-looking for
others, or I should be blond, or they wanted an outdoor type, or I’m
just what they’re looking for, but so are twelve other girls who all
have more acting credits. It’s not easy.”

“It’s no easier for me,” Greta put in mournfully. “I’m an even more
definite physical type than Irene is, and to make matters worse, I have
to act for them. Most of the time, my round, red face and my blond
braids eliminate me at the start. If they don’t, I then have to go
through an audition reading. I’m just waiting for a casting notice that
asks for a new actress with a face like a Campbell’s Soup kid, and I’ll
rush right up and get the part!”

“If I ever meet any playwrights, I’ll put in a word for a part like
that,” Peggy said. “But by then, you’ll be famous, and the ‘new actress’
part would disqualify you.”

When breakfast was over, the girls scraped the dishes, put them in the
sink for Aniko, and went their separate ways.

Gaby was off first, for an early English class at a language school,
which would be followed by a full day at Columbia University studying
English literature, American history, economics, and a special course
called Literature of the Theater. With a small “_au revoir_,” which was
all she had said since her first quiet “_bon jour_,” she slipped out.

“Gaby’s a night person,” Dot explained. “You can hardly get a word out
of her until sunset. Then you’re lucky if you can keep her quiet for
five minutes!”

“How about you?” Peggy asked. “Are you a night person, or a morning
person?”

“I think I must be a twenty-four-hour person.” Dot laughed. “I work on
stage until eleven-fifteen, but it doesn’t keep me from getting up as if
I were on a farm. I have to, though. I have a busy day. We rehearse
three days a week, just to keep the chorus work tight, and I have
special rehearsals for my understudy part. It keeps me going nearly
every day from nine in the morning until after midnight, but I seem to
thrive on it.”

Greta left for her office, to put in a day of script editing (whatever
that is, Peggy thought), Irene went upstairs to “put herself together”
for a photo shooting to take place later in the morning, and Maggie went
off to a rehearsal studio to practice her stretches and scales. Amy and
Peggy sat alone in the kitchen.

“What shall we do?” Peggy asked. “I feel so useless having no program,
and we sure can’t spend the day sitting here in the kitchen.”

“Why don’t we go out for a walk, and learn something about the
neighborhood?” Amy suggested.

“Good! In fact, why don’t we find a sight-seeing bus and take a ride
around the city? My father said—”

“So did mine!” Amy interrupted.

“We get more alike every minute!” Peggy said, grinning. “Let’s go up,
put our things away, and go out to learn all about New York.”


Later that afternoon, sipping her first cup of Automat coffee, Peggy
slipped her shoes off under the table and sighed, “I certainly had a lot
to learn when I said we’d go out and learn all about New York! My feet
are killing me, and we haven’t even begun to see the city!”

“We saw a lot, though,” Amy replied thoughtfully. “We saw Chinatown and
Greenwich Village and the Lower East Side and Riverside Drive and Park
Avenue and Central Park and Sutton Place and....”

“And neither of us could find our way back to any one of them unless we
took a sight-seeing bus again!” Peggy said. “Why, we’ve hardly begun!
I’ve been checking off where we’ve been on my city map and guidebook,
and we haven’t seen anything but the sights the guides think are
picturesque! I saw loads of places that we just shot by that I’d love to
go back and explore when we have time; and the guidebook lists hundreds
of things that we didn’t even come near! Did you know that there are
Italian street festivals, and an Indian mosque, and a Spanish museum,
and shops that sell nothing but cheeses from every country in the world,
and an Armenian district, and a Greek one, and Russian restaurants, and
Japanese, and French and German and Turkish and Mexican and....” She ran
out of breath and stopped, eyes shining with excitement.

“My goodness!” Amy said. “You make it sound like a World’s Fair!”

“It is. It’s the biggest permanent World’s Fair anywhere, and we have a
chance to see it without anything to take our minds off it from now
until school starts!”

“Your energy just scares me,” Amy said in a make-believe little-girl
voice, accentuating her Southern drawl. “Ah’m afraid you’ll just have to
carry li’l ol’ me.”

“I’m afraid you’ll have to do the carrying,” Peggy retorted, “unless I
can get these shoes back on! I think all the walking we’ve done has made
my feet three sizes larger!”

Sensibly, they finished the day’s excursion with a Fifth Avenue bus ride
downtown.


The next few days until the Academy opened were a round of sight-seeing,
eating exotic foods in the restaurants of many lands that Peggy had only
started to enumerate, and shopping in the famous stores.

The shopping expeditions were among the most exciting things that Peggy
and Amy did. The huge stores, crammed with merchandise from all over the
world, were like nothing that they had ever seen before. Even the
afternoon that Peggy had spent window-shopping with her mother had
failed to prepare her for the size and complexity of these shops.
Everywhere were rows on rows of dresses, coats, skirts, blouses, robes,
and gowns. Counters and showcases displayed incredible arrays of
lingerie, purses, shoes, gloves, scarves, and other accessories. And
everywhere, at every time of day, the crowds of shoppers clustered as
thick as bees around a hive.

Beautifully dressed women in furs walked side by side with trim young
secretaries and vied with them for bargains at sales counters.
Embarrassed men sidled past lingerie departments in search of gifts for
their wives and sweethearts; short, stout women admired dresses designed
for tall, slim models; elderly ladies tried on hat after hat, each one
looking less suitable than the last; girls sprayed themselves with
perfume at the cosmetic counters, or stood and watched demonstrators at
work. One demonstrator who especially fascinated Peggy was a beautiful
girl with long blond hair, who was showing a new hairstyling spray. She
would spray it on, and with a few expert flips of a comb, create a
hairdo; then, combing it out again, she would quickly arrange it in a
different style. Each one took her only a minute or so to make perfect,
then, out it would come, more spray would be applied, and another
coiffure would be combed in. Peggy wondered how she wore it when it was
time to go home at night. Probably pulled back in a bun, she thought.

These shopping tours represented diversion as much as necessity, though
in the course of visiting all the stores, the girls did buy what they
needed. Peggy got several dresses, some skirts and sweaters, a new coat,
shoes, bag, and a hat. Also, on Amy’s advice, she bought some school
things that would be suitable for stage work, plus a leotard, tights and
ballet shoes that Mr. Macaulay’s secretary had told her she would need.

When neither girl could think of anything else that she needed to buy,
the temptation to revisit the stores just to see things was still great.

“We’d better not, though,” Peggy said sensibly. “I don’t think I’m
strong enough to resist temptation, and I’ve just about used up all my
clothing allowance. Let’s visit some museums next.”

“Oh dear,” Amy sighed. “I suppose it’s a good idea, all right, but I
just wish school would hurry up and start. I’m afraid I’m going to get
indigestion from swallowing all of New York in one big gulp!”

So did Peggy, but museums were on her “little list,” and museums it
would be. Besides, she knew that once school began, she would have
little time for anything else.

So the guidebook came out once more, together with the flat walking
shoes. But, though their time was spent in museums, their minds were in
the future, and their talk was of nothing but the Academy, which was due
to open in a few short days.




                                  VIII
                              _First Act_


Peggy and Amy thought they had arrived early for opening day at the New
York Dramatic Academy, but when they entered the old building, they
found the long hallway filled to capacity with students waiting their
turn on the ancient elevators.

Some obviously new students milled around aimlessly, looking somewhat
lost and more than a little frightened. Peggy wondered if she and Amy
looked the same, and made a determined effort to appear at ease and
knowing. But her pose couldn’t have been very convincing, for a small,
thin boy with huge glasses and a shock of black hair came over to them
with a grin and said, “You’re new, aren’t you?”

“Why, yes,” Peggy answered. “Do we show it?”

“Oh, no, not at all,” he assured them earnestly. “You look just fine.
It’s just that I’ve been here two years, and I know everyone. I’m Pete
Piper, but everyone calls me Pip. I just thought I’d help lead you
through the maze, if you’d like.”

Peggy and Amy introduced themselves, and thanked Pip for his help.

“Oh, don’t thank me,” he said. “Everybody does it. Whenever we see new
students on the first day, the old-timers introduce themselves and offer
to help. It’s kind of a custom.”

Looking around, Peggy noticed that the “lost lambs” she had first seen
were by now in conversation with other, older students, and all of them
looked a good deal more relaxed.

“I think it’s a lovely custom,” Amy said. “It makes our Southern
Hospitality look right cold by comparison!”

By this time, it was their turn at the elevator doors, which suddenly
flew open with their usual wail of protest. Peggy, Amy, and Pip were
almost carried in, with no need to walk at all, by the mass of students
around them, and soon were packed as tight as berries in a basket.
Protesting loudly, the elevator slowly ascended.

Upstairs, the halls which had been nearly empty when Peggy had last seen
them were now swarming with students. The ones who seemed to know where
they were going swirled and eddied around others who looked around
doubtfully and hesitated to go anywhere.

Pip shook his head and said, “More waifs and strays up here, I see. I’ll
set you on your way, and then gather up a new crop. You just go right
into the little theater—ahead of you, through those doors—and take
seats. From there on, you’ll be told what to do and where to go. I’ll
see you around.”

He started off to gather a new group of first-term students, but before
he had taken more than three steps, he was back again. “Let’s have lunch
together with some of the others,” he said. “That okay with you?”

“We’d love to,” the girls chorused.

“Good. Meet you downstairs in front of the building at twelve. S’long!”

Feeling no longer lost, but already a part of their new school
community, Peggy and Amy proceeded into the little theater, found seats
near the front, and started to introduce themselves to the other new
students nearest them. The exchange of names, home towns, impressions,
and ambitions occupied the next fifteen minutes or more until the
dimming of the house lights and the illumination of the stage brought a
hush to the small auditorium.

The last few whispers died when Mr. Macaulay walked to stage center,
bowed formally to the right, the left and the center, and then
unexpectedly sat down on the apron of the stage with his legs dangling.

“The bows were your formal welcome to the Academy, and I hope they take
the place of a speech,” Mr. Macaulay began. “I hate speeches. From now
on, we’re going to be informal and friendly, because that’s the only
atmosphere in which people can get any work done. And you have a lot of
work to do. You will have physical work in which you will learn to walk,
to move, to dance a little, to stand up and to sit down. You may think
you already know how to do these things, but you probably don’t.

“You will have mental work,” he went on, “in which you will learn how to
read a play, how to understand the motivation of a character and his
relationship to the other characters. You will learn elocution, voice
projection, and a dozen other things that have to do with speaking
lines. You will learn the history of the theater, become familiar with
the classic plays, and learn something about stage design and
construction. In this last area, you will pick up the practical craft of
making flats, painting scenery, and wiring lighting—a type of pedestrian
work that has occupied the time of nearly every actor before he was
allowed to appear even in a walk-on role.

“And last, and perhaps most important,” Mr. Macaulay concluded, “you
will learn that the informality and friendliness of the theater must not
be mistaken for lack of discipline; in short, you will learn how to take
direction!”

Still seated on the edge of the stage, Mr. Macaulay called out his staff
of instructors one by one, introduced each to the students, and gave a
short history of each one’s background and qualifications for his or her
work. All were seasoned professionals, and were very impressive to the
students.

Mr. Macaulay also explained that leading performers from the Broadway
stage, movies, and television would make regular guest appearances at
the Academy, as would outstanding directors, choreographers, designers,
and playwrights. The size of the staff, in effect, was unlimited.

After this, the individual instructors spoke, each saying a few words
about his specialty and what he hoped to achieve in his course. Each
one, it seemed to Peggy, opened up whole new areas of knowledge for her,
until at the end she felt that she knew absolutely nothing at all, and
wondered how she could ever have thought of herself as an actress. This
was going to take a lot of work!

After the meeting, the rest of the morning was spent in the routine of
registration, getting class cards, finding out where the rooms were,
getting locker assignments and book lists and, bit by bit, eliminating
the first sense of confusion.

Peggy and Amy, happily, were registered in the same class, and went
together through the busy morning. Before they knew it, it was time for
lunch with Pip Piper and “some of the others.”

The others proved to be Connie Barnes, a cheerful comedienne who managed
to be wonderfully attractive without being in the least pretty, and a
dark, muscular, tough-looking young man with a face like either a
private detective or a gangster in a grade-B movie, who was introduced
by Pip as Mallory Seton.

Much to Peggy’s surprise, when he spoke it was not at all the tough, New
York sound she had expected, but a quiet, cultured English accent. “Call
me Mal,” he said. “Mallory’s rather a mouthful, isn’t it? At least, it
seems so here. At home, they used to call me ‘Mallory John’ all the
time, so as not to confuse me with my father, who is named ‘Mallory
Peter,’ but I can’t imagine anyone in America doing that. If I’d been
brought up here, I’d probably have been called ‘Bud.’”

Following Pip, the students walked around the corner to stop in front of
a narrow delicatessen store. The sign on the window said, “Tables in the
rear,” but Peggy could see from the crowd that clustered at the counter
that there would be no chance of getting one. And besides, the place
didn’t look wide enough to hold a table that would seat the five of
them.

“Oh dear,” she said, “I don’t think we’re going to be able to eat here,
there are so many of us. Perhaps if Amy and I went somewhere else, you
three would have a chance? We don’t want to make it difficult for you—”

“Don’t be silly,” Pip cut in. “We didn’t expect to get a table here.
You’re lucky if you can get a seat at the counter for one, much less a
table for more than one. We’re going to buy sandwiches here and take
them to the park.”

Whipping out a notebook, Pip started to take orders and money, with
frequent reference to the menu pasted to the delicatessen window. Then
he plunged into the place and, in less time than Peggy thought possible,
was back with a giant bag full of sandwiches and cold, bottled drinks.

It was only two blocks to the southern boundary of Central Park, and
once they had crossed Fifty-ninth Street and stepped into the
tree-shaded, winding footpath, the city seemed to disappear behind them
as if it had never been. At the foot of the first gentle hill, there was
a small lake bordered by a bench-lined path. There were some empty
benches, but Pip ignored them.

“If you don’t mind walking a little farther,” he said, “we have a
favorite spot on the opposite shore, where hardly anyone ever comes.”

The path brought them across a small arched footbridge, through a thick
copse, and out alongside a broad lawn which ran down to the lake’s
shore. It was here that they chose to eat, sitting on the grass.

“Now that we’re comfortably settled,” Mal said, “I have some great news
for you, but first I think we ought to tell Peggy and Amy what we’re
talking about, so they won’t feel left out of the conversation. Connie,
you tell them about the play.”

“Just a minute, Connie,” Pip interrupted. Then he turned to the
newcomers. “Do you know what the term ‘Off-Broadway’ means?”

“Why, yes, I think so,” Peggy replied. “It means you’re not using one of
the regular, big theaters, and you charge less admission, and—”

“More than that,” Pip broke in. “It’s generally an experimental
group—though that doesn’t mean necessarily that it’s amateur, and one
thing you can be sure of—it never has enough money. Everybody has to do
a little of everything. Now go on, Connie.”

“Well, the three of us are in that kind of group,” Connie started, “and
we’re trying to produce a play off-Broadway. We’ve been working at it
for about six months now, trying to raise the money and get a theater
and do all the rest of the work that goes into these things. The play is
called _Lullaby_, and it’s terrific, or it will be if it ever gets
produced. Mal’s going to direct it, and I’m already cast as the
comedienne, and Pip plays opposite me. There are a few more of us in it
too, of course, and there’s Randy Brewster, who wrote it and is
producing it. But I want to hear the great news before I talk any more.
What is it, Mal?”

“I don’t want it to be a shock,” Mal said, “so I’ll say it very slowly.
Randy has raised almost all the money we need, and he’ll have the rest
in a few days. It looks as if we’re actually going to get this on the
boards this season—if we can find a theater for it!”

“Wonderful!” Connie breathed.

“Wow!” Pip exploded.

“But where did he get the money? What happened? Do you know?” Connie
asked.

“You remember the reading we did at that Park Avenue penthouse a couple
of months ago?” Mal asked. “The one where all the people seemed so cold
and hostile, and we felt that we had made a miserable botch of it?”

“Don’t tell me!” Connie said.

“All right,” Mal said, his tough features composing themselves into a
broad grin, “I won’t.”

“It’s only an Americanism, Mal,” Pip said eagerly, “and it means ‘tell
me.’”

“Oh, I would never have guessed,” Mal said innocently. “Well, that was
the reading that did it. Actually, those penthouse people weren’t
hostile at all. It’s just what they consider good manners or something.
Anyway, several of them came through, and we have almost all we need to
put the play on. And Randy says that once you have most of the money, it
gives other investors confidence, and they come along, too.”

“How much do you need?” Peggy asked. “I shouldn’t think it would take so
very much to do an off-Broadway play.”

“Those were the good old days,” Pip said mournfully. “Nowadays you need
at least ten thousand dollars, which is still practically nothing
compared to what it costs to put a show on Broadway. You have to pay
high rent for theaters now, if you can find one at all, and you have to
spend money on costumes and sets, because the public expects more from
off-Broadway than they used to. And you have to pay your actors, or else
Equity, which is the actors’ union, won’t let you open. And you have to
advertise, and print tickets, and pay for lighting equipment and a
hundred other things. It all adds up to a lot of cash.”

“Will the backers have a chance of making money?” Amy asked.

“Well, it all depends on the type of theater we can find, and on the
critical reviews of the play,” Mal explained. “If the reviews are good,
and if the theater holds enough people, and if they keep coming for long
enough, there’s a chance. If any one of those factors is lacking, then
there isn’t a chance.”

“What’s the play about?” Peggy asked.

Connie frowned and said, “That’s kind of hard to answer. It’s a comedy,
but at the same time it’s a serious play. I mean it’s serious in what it
talks about, but funny in the way it says it. It’s mostly about a boy
genius—”

“That’s me!” Pip interrupted.

“—who feels that the only way to get along in the world is not to let
people know how smart he is, because people are jealous and suspicious
of people who are too smart. He meets a girl genius—that’s me—who has
come to the same conclusion. Both of them try to act like ordinary
people, and to adjust to the world, because everybody says it’s best to
conform and be just like everybody else—”

“And one of the main problems is that neither one of them wants to let
the other one know that he or she is any different,” Pip interrupted,
“and that leads to a lot of misunderstanding and—”

“And a lot of serious discussion under the comedy,” Mal said, “about
whether or not conformity is any good, and what to do with outstanding
people, and how they can be educated, and how to use them properly in
the world. It’s a really first-rate play.”

“It sounds wonderful!” Peggy said. “Has this Randy Brewster written any
other plays? Who is he?”

“Randy has written lots of others,” Mal answered, “but this is the first
one that looks as if it’s going to be produced. He’s a good playwright,
and I think he’s going to be a success. At least I hope so, because if
the play is well received, we all have a chance of success too.”

“What does he do besides write plays?” asked Amy.

“He’s a dancer and a singer,” Connie said. “He’s been working in night
clubs and on television, and he’s good, but he has a real talent as a
writer, and we all agree that he’s wasted as just another song-and-dance
man. If you want to see him, you can tune in to your television set on
Saturday night. He’s got a spot on the Road Show hour.”

“I haven’t got a television set,” Peggy answered, “though I guess I
could find one to watch, but I’d like to do more than look in on this
via TV. Is there anything I could do to help with the show?”

“Well....” Mal began doubtfully, “we’re almost all cast for it now, and
the few parts that are open aren’t exactly your type—”

“Oh, no!” Peggy said. “I didn’t mean to ask for a part! Why, I’m just
beginning here, and I don’t think I’d be good enough at all! No, I meant
that if you need an extra pair of hands to make costumes, or to paint
flats or to sell space in the theater program, I’m volunteering. I’ll
run errands, or—”

“Me, too!” Amy put in. “Can you use a pair of maids-of-all-work?”

“We sure can!” Connie said eagerly. “That’s the hardest kind of people
to find. I’m certainly glad that Pip thought to ask you two to lunch!”

Mal looked quite relieved to find that he was not to be put in the
position of having to refuse more actresses. Since word about the
project had first gotten out around the Academy, he had been besieged
with students who wanted to be in it, and the work of casting and at the
same time not hurting the feelings of friends had been pretty difficult.

As they strolled back to the Academy, Mal told the girls that there was
to be a meeting of the theater group that evening at Connie’s apartment,
and invited them to attend. “I know that everybody will be glad to meet
you, and you’ll get a chance to read the play and to find out what we’re
up against in trying to produce it.”

After leaving their new friends in the school corridor, Amy and Peggy
went off to their first elocution class, feeling as if they were really
a part of the Academy and the new life around them, and looking forward
eagerly to the meeting at Connie’s that night.




                                   IX
                            _Theater Party_


Connie’s apartment was not the easiest place to find, but she had given
detailed instructions, even to drawing a little map on a paper napkin,
and after only a few wrong turnings, Peggy and Amy found themselves that
night at a low pink door set in a high brick wall on a winding street in
Greenwich Village. They pushed the button marked “Barnes-Lewis,” and
soon an answering buzz let them know that the door was unlocked.

Pushing it open, they entered, not a house, but a narrow alley between
two buildings. Along one wall was a bed of flowers and green borders,
and hidden among them were small floodlights which gave a gentle,
guiding glow. At its end, the alley opened into a little courtyard with
a small fountain and a statue of a nymph surrounded by canvas lawn
chairs. Fronting on it was an old, low, white-brick house, its door
opened wide. Connie came out to greet them.

“I see you didn’t have any trouble finding our hideaway,” she said. “I
must be a good map-maker.”

Tactfully refraining from telling her about the wrong turns, Peggy and
Amy agreed with her.

“What a wonderful place you have here!” Peggy said. “However did you
find it?”

“I didn’t find it,” Connie said. “I found Linda Lewis, my roommate,
which was a good deal easier. She was already living here, and when her
roommate got married, she asked me if I’d move in.”

“And how did she find it?” Amy asked.

“Same way,” Connie laughed. “These places get passed along from friend
to friend. You could hunt for apartments every day for a year and never
even see a place like this. You just have to know somebody, or be lucky.
I’d hate to show you the miserable place I lived in before I moved in
here.”

“Here” proved to be a spacious room with an extraordinarily high ceiling
and a fireplace with a tremendous copper hood. An open stairway mounted
up one wall to a landing, then turned a corner and went up again. The
only other room downstairs was a kitchen. Upstairs were two bedrooms and
a bath.

“That’s the whole house,” Connie explained. “It used to be a carriage
house for one of the big places on the street, before all the big places
were turned into apartments. Now come on in and meet everybody.”

Linda Lewis, Connie’s roommate, rose from the piano bench to greet the
girls. She had apparently been playing until the bell had announced
their arrival. Linda was a tall, slim, rather plain girl with a sweet
smile who was a music student at Juilliard, considered by most people to
be the best music school in the country. She greeted them shyly, and
returned to her place at the keyboard, where she began playing quietly,
as if to herself.

Pip rose from his seat on the raised hearth of the fireplace to greet
them and to introduce them to his companion, a striking woman in her
mid-thirties. “This is Mona Downs. She’s in the play, too.”

Before they had a chance to do more than say hello, Connie was
introducing them to the last person in the room, a handsome middle-aged
man with curly dark hair that had turned completely white at the
temples. His name was Thomas Galen, and he, too, was a member of the
cast.

“I suppose it’s terribly tactless of me,” Peggy said, “but I don’t mean
it that way at all. It’s just that I always thought that these
off-Broadway plays were done entirely by students or—or—very young
actors and actresses. I mean....”

Mona Downs laughed. “Don’t feel embarrassed to talk about our advanced
ages. We aren’t supposed to look like fresh young things!”

Tom Galen smiled in agreement. “We’re here because Randy needed some
actors for the more mature parts, and we were lucky enough to be picked.
The off-Broadway plays are a good showcase for experienced actors, too,
you know. Take me, for instance—I’ve been acting for a good many years
now, but I’ve never had any really good vehicles. I’ve made a living on
supporting roles and road shows, and I’ve even played some good leads in
stock, but somehow I’ve never quite hit it. Maybe I’m not good enough,
but on the other hand, I may just not have had the breaks. These
off-Broadway shows nowadays are seen by all the top critics in New York,
and if I do a good job, and if they like the play, I have a chance to go
on to a whole new kind of career. That’s why I’m here, and that’s why
Mona is here. Besides, you can’t do a believable show with just young
actors.”

“I see,” Peggy nodded. “And I hope you didn’t mind my mentioning it....”

But before Tom Galen or Mona Downs had a chance to reassure her again,
the buzzer rang, and they broke off.

“That must be Randy and Mal,” Connie said. “I’ll go get them.”

She pushed the button to unlock the gate, and opened the front door
expectantly. A few seconds later, Mal entered with a tall, grinning,
engaging-looking young man with flaming red hair. For a moment, everyone
seemed to be talking at once. Randy and Mal were apologizing for being
late; Connie was saying that they weren’t late at all; Pip was trying to
get Randy away to introduce him to Amy and Peggy; Mona and Tom were
asking him about the financing he had managed to get for the show, and
Linda was playing “Hail the Conquering Hero” in loud, solid chords.

When the initial excitement had died down and the last resounding notes
of the piano had quieted, Randy Brewster was introduced to Peggy and Amy
by an excited Connie.

“We’re having all the luck today!” she exclaimed. “You come up with the
backing for the play, and Pip discovers these two wonderful girls who
want to be beasts of burden for the show!”

“The two prettiest beasts in New York, I’m sure,” Randy said with a
smile, and Peggy was positive that she was blushing, though she tried
her hardest not to. “I’m grateful for your interest,” Randy continued,
“and I only hope that we have a chance to use your help.”

“Why, now that you’ve raised the money, isn’t it certain that the play
will be produced?” Peggy asked.

“We have a better chance today than we had yesterday,” Randy explained,
“but it’s far from a sure thing yet. You see, we have the central
problem now of trying to find a theater we can use. And I’m afraid
that’s going to prove to be a harder job than raising the money, or even
than writing the play in the first place.”

“Mal and Pip and Connie mentioned the problem of finding a theater a few
times today,” Peggy said, “but I didn’t know it was as serious as all
that. Why should there be such a shortage?”

“For a lot of reasons,” Randy answered. “And there’s a shortage even on
Broadway—maybe even a worse one. Forty years ago, there were more than
twice the number of theaters in New York than there are now, and every
year we lose a few more. One reason is the fire laws that make it
illegal to have a theater with anything built over it. In other words,
you can’t have a Broadway theater on the lower floors of an office
building; and with real-estate values as high as they are in Manhattan,
it just isn’t profitable to use up all the space a theater takes without
building high up as well. Off-Broadway rules are a little easier, but
the downtown theater has become so popular that everybody and his
brother wants to put on a play off-Broadway, and all the available
theaters are booked way in advance. Not only that, but dramatic groups
have rented almost all the places that can be converted to theaters, and
there don’t seem to be any left for us.” Then, breaking his serious
expression with a sudden grin, he said, “But don’t let it worry you. I’m
trusting to luck that we’ll find something.”

“I hope luck does it,” Peggy said doubtfully, “but I’d prefer to trust
in something a little more trustworthy!”

“If you have any ideas, I’ll be happy to hear them,” Randy said, “but
right now, we’d better get on with this evening’s meeting and reading.
I’ll talk to you over sandwiches and coffee afterward, if you like.”

Peggy delightedly accepted, then found herself a seat with Amy out of
the way to watch the proceedings.

First, Randy told the assembled group about the investment in the play,
and about his hopes for the small remaining amount they would need.
Then, having completed his report, he turned the evening over to Mallory
Seton, who immediately began the readings with an authority and
toughness that went well with his rugged face.

Peggy observed carefully how Mal would interrupt one or another of the
actors, acting out a line for him or her, or asking for a somewhat
different emphasis. Sometimes a small change in timing or inflection
would turn an ordinary line into an unexpectedly comic one, and Peggy
and Amy laughed aloud several times.

Randy followed with his master script, every so often stopping the
action to make a change in dialogue. “Sometimes a thing sounds fine when
you write it, but it just doesn’t read well,” he explained. “That’s one
of the main purposes of these early readings—to let me have a chance to
hear what I’ve written and see if it plays.”

Other changes were made at the suggestion of one or another of the cast,
who found a line unnatural to say, or somehow uncomfortable or out of
character. Randy listened to every suggestion, and took most of them,
but on one or two occasions he insisted that the actors accommodate
themselves to what he had written.

Peggy was fascinated by the whole process, and particularly appreciated
the air of good will with which changes in script, style of reading, and
interpretation of character were made. This was a company of willing,
hard-working friends, and they were already molding the play in a joint
effort. She was sure that they would be successful.

At last the readings for the evening were completed, and people started
to say good night. Randy brought Mal with him and said, “Why don’t you
come along for coffee and a sandwich with us? Peggy seems to have some
ideas about the theater problem.”

“Oh, no!” Peggy disclaimed. “Not really! I was just wondering if—”

“Let’s wonder over coffee,” Mal cut in. “Come on, Amy. Let them talk
about the theater, and we can talk about you!”

A few blocks’ walk brought the four of them to a coffee shop where,
seated around a tiny marble-topped table, they studied the menu. To
Peggy and Amy it was a revelation. There were over twenty kinds of
coffee offered, most of which they had never heard of, plus dozens of
exotic pastries and sandwiches. They finally settled, on Randy’s advice,
on _cappuccino_, which proved to be coffee flavored with cinnamon and
topped with a froth of milk, and which was perfectly delicious. With it,
they had an assortment of _amaretti_—hard, sweet Italian macaroons that
came wrapped in gaily decorated tissues, and cornetti—pastry horns
filled with some creamy whip.

“Now,” Randy said, when they were all served, “what did you have in mind
about a theater for us?”

“Well, nothing at the moment,” Peggy admitted, “but I’m against the idea
of just trusting to luck, the way you said you were going to do. It
seems to me that some hard looking would get better results.”

“I agree, and I have been looking,” Randy replied. “We have our names on
the waiting lists of every known off-Broadway theater in the city, and I
call regularly just to remind them that we’re serious about it.”

“Have you been looking around for a place that you might convert to a
theater, too?” Peggy asked.

“We gave up on that. We found that it would cost too much to do a decent
conversion, and not only that, but we’d be in the real-estate business
as well as the play-producing business, and we don’t want that.”

Peggy nodded thoughtfully. “I see. Well, how about all the theaters that
you said used to be in existence forty years ago? What’s happened to all
of them? Maybe some of them are just sitting around and not being used.”

“Oh, they’re being used!” Randy laughed. “They’re being used as movie
houses and television studios and ice-skating rinks and churches and
even supermarkets.”

“Have you looked at them all?” Peggy pursued.

“Well....” Randy said, “maybe not all, but....”

“Then that’s what I’m going to do for you first!” Peggy announced with
determination. “I’ll go look at them all, and maybe I can find some
usable place. At least, I’m willing to try.”

“But, Peggy,” Mal put in, “you don’t know anything about New York at
all! It’s not like Rockport, Wisconsin. It takes a lot of looking, and
you have to know where to look. How will you start?”

 [Illustration: A few blocks’ walk brought the four of them to a coffee
                               shop....]

“I don’t know just yet,” Peggy answered, “but I’ll think of a way. I
used to help out as a reporter on my father’s newspaper, and I’m used to
digging up facts. If there’s an empty theater in New York City, I’ll bet
I know about it in a couple of weeks. If there isn’t one, I’ll know that
too, and at least that will save the rest of you all the trouble of
looking.”

Randy looked a little doubtful. “I’m sure that you mean what you say,
and I don’t doubt that you can get things done as well as any of us,
Peggy, but as Mal said, New York isn’t Rockport. And I don’t mean just
that it’s bigger. It’s not a—well, a _nice_ city in every part. And a
search like this can lead you into some pretty tough parts of town.”

“Oh, pooh!” Peggy said. “In the last two weeks, I’ll bet Amy and I have
walked around more of New York than either of you has in the last two
years! And that included some pretty tough-looking neighborhoods, and
nobody bothered us, and everybody was very nice. I think that’s a lot of
nonsense! Besides, we’re big girls, and we can take care of ourselves by
now.”

“We certainly can,” Amy agreed. “And I plan to go, too, just the way
I’ve dragged my aching feet after Peggy for two weeks now. That girl can
cover more territory in a morning than a Tennessee Walking Horse can
manage in a whole day!”

“Well, if you really want to try, it’s okay with me,” Randy said. “And
I’m grateful to you for wanting to. If you need any help along the way,
be sure to ask for it.”

“You can start by giving me a list of all the places you’ve gone to, so
I won’t waste my time, and I’ll take it from there.”

Randy promised to bring the list to the Academy the next day, at which
time, if it was okay with Peggy and Amy, he would like to join them for
lunch. Then their interest turned to other things, including more coffee
for the girls and another huge sandwich to be split between the boys.

By the time they had finished and walked to the Gramercy Arms, it was
nearly midnight. Peggy and Amy whispered quiet good nights on the
stairs, and hurried up to bed. Tomorrow was school again, and they
needed all the sleep they could get.




                                   X
                        _Peggy Produces a Plot_


“Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled peppers; a peck of pickled peppers
Peter Piper picked; if Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled peppers,
where’s the peck of pickled peppers Peter Piper picked?”

“A perfect peck of pickled peppers, Peggy,” said Miss Linden, the
elocution instructor, “except that you picked them a trifle too quickly.
That’s the big temptation of tongue twisters; you always want to show
that you can rip them out at great speed without making a mistake. What
I want you to do this time is to say the same thing, but to concentrate
on a normal rate of delivery that will allow your voice to carry to the
rear of a hall without becoming blurred. Distance, you know, tends to
make sounds run together. Now, Peggy, if you don’t mind....”

More slowly this time, and concentrating on making her words reach the
back of some huge, imaginary hall, Peggy once more spoke the tongue
twister.

“Much better. Much better,” Miss Linden approved. “Now, John, will you
please read ‘round and round the rugged rock the ragged rascals ran,’
and try to read it as if it had a meaning, as if those ragged rascals
were at the end of their endurance, as if you were one of them, almost.
Make the words clear, project them, and at the same time give me a note
of urgency and a feeling of near-exhaustion.”

John, a handsome boy whom Peggy had already judged vain and stupid and
who, she suspected, had gone into acting on the strength of his
appearance, struggled with the assignment. Peggy tried to maintain an
interest in what he was doing, but her mind was on her coming lunch
meeting with Randy Brewster.

What on earth was she going to suggest? Why had she volunteered to
undertake the search for a theater with such confidence? It had been
bothering her since she had awakened this morning, and the more she
thought about it, the less likely it seemed that she would come up with
an idea worth pursuing. Still, there must be some angle that Randy and
Mal hadn’t thought of, some idea that would occur to her, with her
reporter’s training, that had escaped them. That all sounded very good,
she commented to herself, but what was the angle? Miss Linden’s tongue
twisters were child’s play compared to this puzzle.

Before her turn came to read again, it was time for the elocution class
to end and time to go, empty-headed, to meet Randy. Peggy had never in
her life felt so stupid, nor so embarrassed, for having made the boast
last night that she could find what they had missed.

Amy, sensing the reason for Peggy’s gloomy silence, didn’t question her
about it. Without a word, the two girls moved through the crowded
corridor to the elevators, rode downstairs, and stationed themselves at
the front door. Finally Peggy spoke.

“Oh, Amy, I hope he doesn’t think I’m a complete fool! I like him so
much, and I’ve made him take this special trip to bring me his list of
theaters, and if I don’t come up with an idea that makes sense, I won’t
blame him for thinking I’m a dope!”

“Are you trying to find a theater or a boy friend?” Amy asked with a sly
smile.

Blushing, Peggy stammered, “Why, Amy, I ... I just met him last night
... the same as you ... and ... Oh dear! Here he comes now, and I look
like an embarrassed lobster!”

“Don’t worry,” Amy said with a laugh, “with his red hair and your red
face, you make a lovely couple!”

Before Peggy could answer, Randy had reached them and either did not
notice, or gallantly pretended not to notice Peggy’s confusion. He
greeted them with a smile, and gaily waved a large paper bag.

“I took the liberty of ordering for you, ladies,” he announced in the
manner of a musical-comedy headwaiter. “The caviar, _pâté de foie gras_,
and pheasant under glass are not of the best quality today, so I decided
instead to get ham on rye, pickles, and potato chips. I also have two
cartons of milk of a superior vintage. We dine on the terrace by the
lake.”

In the laughter, Peggy regained her self-possession, and the three of
them started for the park where, Randy told them, they would be joined
by Pip and Connie.

At the mention of Pip, Amy said, “I was wondering how, with a name like
Peter Piper, Pip ever got through that tongue-twister stuff. It must
have been terrible for him!”

“Ask him to do it for you sometime,” Randy replied. “He’s learned that
the best defense is a good offense, so long before he came to the
Academy he had that one perfected. He can do Peter Piper in any accent
or dialect you ask, and can even do it in a rapid-fire stutter! It’s
funny enough so that nobody ever kidded him about it. In fact, he’s got
it worked up into part of a first-rate comedy bit.”

On their arrival at the lawn by the lake, they found that Randy had
brought a large paper table-cloth and some oversized paper napkins for
the girls to sit on. As she helped set out the lunch, Peggy was
impressed by this extra display of thoughtfulness, and felt that she had
been right in thinking Randy Brewster was a special kind of person. She
had just finished setting the “table” when Connie and Pip joined them
and added their own lunches to the spread.

When they were all settled comfortably, Randy opened the conversation
with the question that Peggy had been fearing all morning. “Well, Peggy,
I brought the list of theaters we’ve seen, and now will you tell us what
you have in mind?”

       [Illustration: When they were all settled comfortably....]

Much to her surprise, Peggy found herself answering as smoothly as if
she had known all along what she was going to do. “The first thing,” she
said, “is to make use of all the city records. Since a license is
required to operate a theater, there must be a list of all the places in
the city that have been licensed. I’m going to go to City Hall, find the
list, and copy the names and addresses of every theater that has been
opened in the last fifty or sixty years.”

“Are you sure the city will let you see the records?” Connie asked.

“Of course,” Peggy answered. “They have to. Anything in the city files
that doesn’t concern individuals is a matter of public record. I learned
that from my father. He always said that the city or town archives of
any place were the best reference books a reporter could want.”

“I think that makes good sense, Peggy,” Randy commented. “But it’s going
to be a long list. What are you going to do when you’ve got it?”

“I’m not sure,” Peggy admitted, “but I think the best thing to do would
be to cut the list down before I start to work with it.”

“I see,” Randy said. “That’s why you wanted the list of theaters we’ve
already visited, so you could eliminate them.”

“Right. The next thing to do, I think,” Peggy went on, with a dreamlike
feeling that she did not know at all what she was going to say next, “is
to look up theaters in the classified telephone book. All the ones that
are listed, I’ll eliminate from my list, on the theory that they’re
probably being used by somebody right now.”

“Peggy, you’re a smart girl,” Pip said admiringly.

“You sure are,” Connie echoed.

“I won’t dispute that,” Randy agreed, “but I’m still a little puzzled.
When you’ve eliminated all the theaters listed in the phone book from
the theaters listed by the license bureau, what will you have?”

“What I’ll have,” Peggy said triumphantly, “is a record of all the
places in New York that started out to be theaters and aren’t theaters
now!”

“Wonderful!” Amy said. “Then you and I will go to visit all the
addresses and see if any of the places aren’t being used, and if they’re
for rent!”

“It makes a lot of sense,” Randy admitted. “But you know, it’s going to
take a lot of work and a lot of walking. And disappointment, too. You
won’t be able to find even a trace of many of those theaters.”

“On the other hand,” Peggy answered, “we may be able to find a hidden
theater that nobody even knows is there! And wouldn’t that be grand?”

“I can see it all now,” Pip said in a hollow voice. “A huge, haunted
opera house of a theater, its hangings in tatters, its chandeliers
covered with dust and its stage peopled by the ghosts of players long
gone! There it sits, undiscovered, unknown, hiding behind a Chinese
restaurant just a block east of Broadway!”

“Don’t tease her, Pip,” Randy said. “I think Peggy has a good idea, and
it would be a pity to discourage her before she gives it a try. Maybe
she won’t find a theater, but at least this is the most sensible way
I’ve heard of yet to start looking for one.”

A little shamefaced, Pip said, “I didn’t mean to tease. You know me; I
always want to turn everything into a comedy routine. But, seriously, I
think this makes sense and, Peggy, if you need any help in tracking down
places, you can count on me!”

All the others chimed in their agreement, and Peggy thought proudly, and
with some surprise, that she had gotten herself out of a spot quite
well. At least Randy didn’t think she was a fool, and that was something
to be pleased about.

When lunch was finished, and the last crumbs had been fed to the ducks,
it was time to return to the Academy. Peggy said good-by to Randy and
went up to her afternoon’s work.

Only by dint of the most intense concentration on the study of
Elizabethan drama did Peggy keep her attention from the theater-hunting
problem. But the minute the class was ended, all other thoughts fled
from her mind. “Come on, Amy!” she said. “I’m heading for City Hall
right now!”

“I’m sorry, Peggy,” Amy said, “but you’ll have to count me out today. I
didn’t know that you’d have any plans, so I made a date to have a soda
with Mallory Seton. I’ll go with you tomorrow, though.”

“And you accused _me_ of looking for a boy friend instead of a theater!”
Peggy said with a grin. “If anybody around here should blush, I think
it’s you, Amy Shelby Preston!”

“Why, Ah don’t know what yo’ talkin’ about!” Amy said, in her best
Southern belle manner. “Mistah Seton asked me to join him, an’ Ah
scarcely thought it would be ladylike to refuse the gentleman!”

Then both girls dissolved into very unladylike giggles, and Peggy made a
dash for the elevator. “See you tonight,” she called.




                                   XI
                              _Rehearsals_


“So. ’Ow marches the search for the theater, Peggee?” Gaby asked,
bouncing into the living room at the Gramercy Arms.

“Awful,” Peggy admitted, looking up at Gaby from her position on the
floor. She was surrounded by scraps of paper, pencils, a classified
telephone directory, and several assorted notebooks, guidebooks, and
city maps. “I think it would be easier to list all the perfume shops in
Paris than all the theaters built in New York since the nineties.”

“Perfume shops! Pouf!” Gaby shrugged. “We don’t ’ave so manee. Most of
our perfume is export, to Amérique. But theaters! Oh! You would ’ave the
same trouble in Paree as you ’ave ’ere. So, _bonne chance_; mean to ’ave
the good luck.” With a wave of her hand she went upstairs.

“A little _bonne chance_ is what I could use right now,” Peggy confessed
to Greta, Maggie, and Amy, who were disposed in various chairs with
books and magazines.

“Anything I can help you with?” Maggie asked.

“No, thanks, Maggie. I’m through the help stage. Amy and I have spent
every afternoon for the last three days just trying to get a list of
theaters from the city archives. It’s not that they’re not helpful down
there. Everybody has been just as nice as can be, but nothing’s easy to
find. In the first place, all the records aren’t kept in one big handy
book, or in a list or anything simple. Oh, no! They’re in dozens and
dozens of volumes marked by year, and we’re trying to go back about
seventy years. Not only that, but the books aren’t separated by kinds of
licenses, so that you can’t just get a volume of theater licenses. You
have to look at each page to see what’s been licensed. There are
groceries and bakeries and amusement parks and drugstores and hardware
stores and livery stables and saddlemakers and—”

“Well, at least you’ve gotten into the early years, I see, if you’re on
livery stables and saddlemakers,” Greta commented.

“You’d think that it would be easier,” Maggie murmured. “I mean, if you
wanted to find out what year the Ziegfeld Theater was licensed, for
instance, would you have to go through all that?”

“Oh, no,” Peggy answered. “They have an alphabetical index by name, and
you could go right to it. But we don’t know the names of the places
we’re looking for, and that’s what makes it so difficult.”

“Even so ... what if the police needed to know, for example, and they
had to know really fast? Suppose they wanted the names of all the
theaters? Would they have to do what you’re doing?” Maggie asked.

“No,” Peggy answered, “and that’s one of the things that makes this so
frustrating. The Police Department has all its own files, and the clerk
who’s been helping us says that we could find out what we want to know
from them in no time at all.”

“Then why...?” Greta began.

“Police files are for the use of the Police Department for police
business,” Peggy interrupted. “We’ve been told that very emphatically.”

“And there aren’t any exceptions,” Amy added, “so poor Peggy and I have
had to make our own police files.”

“And what’s worse,” Peggy went on gloomily, “is the hours we’ve had to
work at it. The bureau closes at four-thirty sharp, and isn’t open on
Saturday, and we’re busy with school all day long. Amy and I don’t
finish with our last class until three o’clock, and then we make a mad
dash downtown. That gives us about an hour a day to go through the
books.”

“How close are you to finishing?” Greta asked.

“That’s the happy part. We finished 1890 today, and that’s as far back
as we’re going to go, unless this batch turns up nothing for us. Then, I
suppose, we’ll try another ten years before we quit. My guess is that
anything built before 1880 wouldn’t be worth looking into anyway. If it
were still standing, it would probably be an old rat’s nest.”

Maggie smiled. “Don’t let May Berriman hear you say anything like that.
This beautiful old house that we’re living in was built in 1878, and
it’s hardly a rat’s nest! And you’ve passed the house that Washington
Irving lived in, just a few blocks south of here? It’s still a
fine-looking house, and I don’t know how old it is, but Washington
Irving died in 1859, so it’s got to be a lot older than that!”

“Oh, Maggie!” Peggy wailed. “You haven’t made me feel the least bit
better! I thought I had a logical date to stop looking, and that made
things easier somehow. Now you’ve opened up the whole thing again!”

“Oh, don’t start to feel sorry for yourself yet,” Greta put in. “You
have a lot of work to do on the theaters you’ve found since 1890 before
you start to think further back. And you may find just what you want in
that list.”

“I sure hope so,” Peggy agreed, smiling wanly. “But I’ll never find it
by lying here and talking. I’d better get back to work.”

“Oh, no, you don’t!” Amy said. “What you’d better do now is go upstairs
and take a shower and fix yourself up! Don’t forget it’s Friday night,
we’ve got a date tonight, and you have a lot to do before the boys
come.”

“But, Amy, it’s still early, isn’t it?” Peggy asked. Then, with a glance
at the grandfather clock in the corner, she gasped. “Oh! Six o’clock
already and they’re coming at seven! And I haven’t even begun! Why
didn’t you tell me?”

Sweeping up all her papers, notebooks, and other gear in a single
gesture, she bounced out of the room with Amy right behind her,
protesting that she hadn’t realized herself how late it had grown, and
that she too had a lot to do to get ready, and....

But before she could finish her sentence, Peggy had dropped her papers,
grabbed a towel and bathrobe and raced for the bathroom. With the door
held open the merest crack, Peggy peeped through, grinning broadly at
Amy, who stood in the hall still apologizing.

“You’re forgiven,” Peggy said impishly, “but your punishment for loafing
and not watching the time while I was working is that I get the bathroom
first!” Then she quickly shut the door before her friend could push her
way through.

“I don’t care!” Amy called through the door. “I can always use the other
one upstairs!”

“You can,” Peggy answered with a laugh, “if you can figure a way to get
Irene the Beautiful Model out. She always goes in at six o’clock, and it
would take an atomic bomb to get her out before seven! You’ll just have
to wait for me!”

Any further conversation was made impossible by the noise of the water
running, and Amy resigned herself with a philosophical sigh, telling
herself that it was probably better for Peggy to go first anyway,
because she always finished quickly, as if that made a difference,
which, of course, it did not.

The timing, however, must have made sense in some mysterious way,
because both girls were ready at precisely the same moment. It was at
the exact instant that the grandfather clock began to chime softly that
Amy and Peggy both stepped from their rooms into the hall and said, in
chorus, “You look lovely! How do I look?”

Laughing at themselves, each girl whirled around and showed herself to
the other. Peggy’s turn made a wide sweep of her black taffeta dress
with its black satin cummerbund smartly making the most of her trim
figure. For this special occasion, her first real date in New York, she
had put her hair up and skillfully used a little eye make-up. Her long,
slender neck was accentuated by a single string of pearls, which were
echoed by her tiny pearl earrings.

Amy had chosen to set off her pale, blond beauty with a brocaded dress
of dark, lustrous green that seemed to add a green glint to her brown
eyes. She wore a delicate, flat gold necklace, small gold earrings and a
slim, antique gold bracelet set with semiprecious stones.

As Peggy fastened a hook and eye for Amy (it was located in that one
spot that just cannot be reached), the last notes of the clock sounded,
followed immediately by the sound of the doorbell.

“That’s Randy and Mal now!” Peggy said. “We’re all so prompt that it’s
hardly possible!” She ran down the stairs to answer the door, Amy at her
heels, and a few minutes later, the four were strolling down the street
arm in arm.

“You sure look beautiful tonight—both of you,” Randy said. “I’m glad
that I decided to wear a tie!”

“If you hadn’t, I’d have sent you right home to get one,” Peggy said
firmly. “And besides, you did say that we should dress up for dinner and
dancing. That is, if you’ll put up with me. I’ve never danced with a
professional dancer before.”

“Oh, I’m not a dancer, really,” Randy said. “I’m a hoofer. You know, tap
and soft-shoe and a couple of gestures and turns that make the customers
think I studied ballet. Mostly I dance just enough to carry off the
singing, so that the act will have a little movement. I hate singers who
just stand there and croon.”

“Where did you study singing?” Peggy asked.

“Oh, I’m not really a singer,” Randy said with a grin. “I just sing
enough so the customers won’t notice that I’m not dancing well!”

“I’d love to see you work and make up my own mind,” Peggy said. “When
can I get a chance?”

With an expression halfway between a smile and a frown, Randy answered,
“I hope that you never get a chance. I’m not working now, and with any
luck, I won’t have to do night-club work again. I’ve always wanted to
write for the theater, and I believe in the play we’re doing now, so
I’ve turned down all engagements until we get it produced. It may be the
break I need. I’ve been able to put away enough to live on for a while,
so I don’t need the night clubs. If the play flops, though, I can always
go back to them, much as I don’t want to.”

“In that case, I hope I never get a chance to see your act, too,” Peggy
said.

“A sensible wish!” Mal put in. “I’ve seen it, and I tell you, as a
singer and dancer, Red Brewster—as he bills himself—is a darn good
playwright. I won’t say it’s the worst night-club act in New York, but—”

“I know,” Randy interrupted cheerfully, “but it is.”

“But he makes a living at it,” Amy protested, taking the lighthearted
insults a little too seriously.

“Just proves an old contention of mine,” Mal answered airily, “that the
public has a lot more money than taste!”

By this time, they had reached Fourteenth Street, a wide, busy
thoroughfare bright with neon lights and gaudy store windows crammed
full of bargain merchandise. It hardly looked the sort of neighborhood
to come to dressed as they were, and for a moment Peggy had a feeling
that Randy hadn’t been joking about coming without a tie. “Where are we
going?” she asked cautiously, not wanting to offend the boys.

Randy laughed. “I wondered whether or not you knew about Fourteenth
Street. Since you’re so deep in the history of the theater, I thought
that we’d take you right into some. This run-down street was once the
heart of the fashionable theater district!” He waved a hand to indicate
the tawdry movie houses, the corner hot-dog stands, the poolrooms, the
pizza places.

“This?” Peggy said.

“This,” Randy answered solemnly. “And the funny thing is that this is
far from being a bad neighborhood. Especially when you compare it with
some of the places you’ll be visiting in the next few days!”

“You see that movie house?” Mal said, pointing to a place plastered with
signs for a double horror monster show. “That was once the most famous
musical theater in the city. And the Irving Theater over there was a
great dramatic showcase.”

“But why are we here tonight?” Amy asked in bewilderment.

“To show you that, in the ashes of the past, a good bit of the past
still flourishes with no sign of decay,” Mal intoned dramatically.

“He means,” Randy interpreted, “that we’re here to eat dinner at
Luchow’s, one of the best restaurants in the city. It’s German, not
Chinese, and you pronounce it with a German _ch_ that sounds like a
cough, if you can. If you can’t, you settle on ‘Loo-shau’s,’ which most
people do. It’s been here since the theater district was here, and it
hasn’t changed at all through all these years. Diamond Jim Brady and
Lillian Russell and Tony Pastor ate here, and tonight we’re going to do
the same!”

With a bow and a flourish, Mal and Randy opened the doors and led the
girls into, not just a restaurant, but another century and another
world.




                                  XII
                             _Intermission_


Peggy had never seen anything like it! The tremendous, high-ceilinged
rooms paneled in darkly polished brown wood led in a seemingly endless
procession from one to the other, connected by arch after arch. In front
of them, across the first room, four steps mounted up to a kind of
gallery, itself an immense chamber that stretched back as far as one
could see. In the front of the gallery, near the steps, a small,
three-piece orchestra played Viennese waltz music. Peggy noted with
amusement that the three musicians looked as old as the restaurant,
almost as if they had been playing ever since opening night.

To the right, an oversized archway connected the room they were in with
what appeared to be the central room of the place, even higher and more
glittering than the others. Peggy’s eyes mounted up toward the ceiling,
which appeared to be three or more stories high, and she saw that it was
a kind of old-fashioned leaded glass skylight.

Another arch between the rooms contained the largest ship model that she
had ever seen. It was a full-rigged ship and stood easily six feet high.
Everything here was on such a large scale! Even the beer steins that
stood all around on shelves high on the paneled walls were immense. Some
would easily hold two quarts of beer.

Everywhere were waiters scurrying about between the crowded tables,
carrying trays loaded to improbable heights with dishes, glasses,
covered serving vessels, baskets of bread, rolls, and cheeses. The whole
place glittered with hundreds of lights, each caught and reflected in
the tall mirrors, the glassware and the polished wood.

And the noise! The many conversations, the clink of silver on dishes,
the rattle of glasses, the waltz tunes of the small orchestra, all
blended into one happy, congenial roar.

Peggy and Amy stood dazzled by the sights and sounds of Luchow’s, and
tried to get their bearings, while Randy and Mal checked their
reservations with the headwaiter. Soon they were assigned by this
impressive personage to a lesser headwaiter whom Peggy thought of as
their guide. This gentleman, beckoning them to follow, plunged into the
jungle of tables and, in a kind of safari fashion, they tracked him
through several rooms, up some steps to a gallery like the one on which
the band was playing, and to a large round table by the rail.

It was not until they were seated that Peggy realized that there was not
an endless number of rooms, but only about six. The illusion was caused
by giant mirrors on either wall, set in arched frames like the arches
that separated the rooms. Even so, it was the biggest and busiest
restaurant that either she or Amy had ever seen.

“Well, what do you think of it?” Randy asked. When Peggy replied with a
smile and a bewildered shake of her head, he continued, “I know. It
always affects me that way, too, but I still love to come here. This is
what New York was really like in the Gay Nineties, and they haven’t
changed a thing that they didn’t have to change. Even the lighting
fixtures,” he pointed out, “are the original gaslights, except that
they’ve had to wire them for electricity. But the best thing is—as it
should be—the food. That hasn’t changed either. Let’s order now, then we
can talk.”

The menu, Peggy thought, was of a size to match the restaurant, and it
was crammed with dishes she had never heard of, most with German names,
many with British names. At Randy’s suggestion, she let him order her
dinner, which was sauerbraten, the house specialty. Amy, less
adventurous about food, settled for roast beef. Randy ordered a lobster
for himself, and Mal asked for roast larded saddle of hare, which made
Amy shudder a little.

“I just don’t like the idea of eating rabbits,” she explained. “They’re
such cute little things!”

Mal grinned. “If you once start to think like that,” he said, “you’d
have a hard time eating at all. Think about all those cute lambs, and
those nice, sweet-tempered cows. And think about—”

“I do my best not to think about them,” Amy interrupted, “and if you
don’t stop, I’m going to order a vegetable dinner and have an awful
time!”

Still, when the food came, she and Peggy consented to try the hare, and
were forced to agree that it was one of the most delicious things they
had ever tasted. Amy also liked Peggy’s sauerbraten, which was a kind of
sweet-and-sour pot roast of beef, done in a rich brown gravy and served
with potato dumplings and red cabbage.

“You know, it’s an odd thing the way Americans eat,” Mal said between
bites of the saddle of hare. “I’ll wager that there are millions of
people in this country who have never eaten anything but beef and pork
and perhaps a bit of fish. And I don’t mean poor people, either. I found
out on my first tours here that there are many parts of the country
where you can’t even get lamb or veal, and mutton is almost unheard of.”

“Is it very different in England?” Peggy asked.

Randy answered before Mal had a chance to reply. “In England they eat
things that would make the average American turn pale with fright.” He
laughed. “They eat suet puddings and kidney pies and chopped toad....”

“Chopped toad!” Amy almost shrieked.

“It’s not at all what it sounds,” Mal explained in his most British
tones. “It’s actually a sort of a hamburger thing, and it’s not made of
toads or anything like toads. And, personally, I can’t stand it.”

“Is the food the reason why you left England?” Amy asked teasingly.

“Partly,” Mal said with a smile. “But not because I didn’t like it. I
liked it well enough when I could get it. The reason I left was that I
wasn’t able to earn enough money to eat with any degree of regularity.
When I got a part with an American movie company that was filming a
picture in England, I was asked to come back with them, and I jumped at
the chance. I made a few films in Hollywood, and then I decided to come
to New York.”

“Why did you leave pictures?” Peggy asked. “I mean, if you were working,
and if you were starting to be an established actor, why did you come to
the Academy to study?”

“I didn’t like the roles I was being given,” Mal answered. “It’s because
of my face, you know. I look like a young thug, so I was given nothing
but young thug parts. But, when you come to think of it, how many roles
are there for young thugs with English accents? Besides, I didn’t want
to spend the whole of my life in cops-and-robbers films. I decided that
I should try the stage, where I might have a chance to play a variety of
roles. Also, I thought I might like to direct. The trouble was that I
had no experience with stage technique, so I applied to the Academy for
a year of basic training. It was there that I met Randy, who has given
me my first chance to direct, and now that I’ve had a taste of it, I
know that’s what I really want to do.”

“It’s nice of you to say that I’ve given you a chance to direct,” Randy
put in, “but unless Peggy and Amy can produce a theater, I’m afraid that
the chance will be a strictly imaginary one. Which reminds me, how are
you girls doing with the search?”

Peggy told him about the troubles they had encountered in making up a
list, and he nodded sympathetically. “We’re finished with that part of
it now,” she said in tones of relief, “and we only have to finish
checking against the phone book before we go out to look.”

“And when will you start?” Randy asked.

“Tomorrow afternoon, I think,” she said. “We ought to be done with the
telephone book by noon, if we don’t sleep the whole morning away as a
result of this heavy dinner. Then we can look in the afternoon.”

“Sounds good,” Randy said. “It looks as if the best help we can give you
is to see to it that you work off this dinner so that you don’t waste
the morning in sleep! What do you suggest, Mal?”

“Dancing,” Mal said firmly. “Best way to get rid of the full feeling.
But, unfortunately, I can’t dance on an empty stomach, so we’d best
order a sweet, right?”

The girls and Randy protested with groans, but somehow managed to eat
every scrap of the thin pancakes with lingonberries that Mal ordered for
them. A final cup of coffee, and then it was time to go.

“I feel as if my dress is going to split any minute!” Peggy whispered to
Amy. “I don’t know if I’ll be able to walk to the door, much less
dance!”

Stepping out of Luchow’s, leaving its noise, gaiety, and glitter behind,
was once more like making a transition between worlds. Fourteenth
Street, now almost deserted, looked even sadder and more run-down than
before. The night lights in the windows of the closed shops cast baleful
gleams on the pavement; the thin sound of a cheap dance band far off
lent its sad jazz beat to the relatively quiet night. Peggy shivered a
little in the first chill of autumn.

“It’s like two different cities, in there and out here,” she said. “It’s
a shame, isn’t it, that the real one is out here?”

Catching her mood, Randy put a reassuring arm about her shoulders. “It’s
two hundred different cities,” he said, “and the real one is wherever
you happen to be at the moment. So let’s leave this one, to make it
unreal, and go uptown. By the time we turn our backs on this, it will
disappear.”

And it did disappear, or nearly, in the sophisticated decor and subdued
harmonies of the St. Regis Roof. Randy was, as Peggy had suspected, a
fine dancer. His lightness and his certainty helped her, and she knew
that she had never danced so well before. But even as they floated about
the gleaming floor, the sounds of the elegant music could not quite
drown out the tinny jazz sound of Fourteenth Street that echoed in her
mind.

No, she thought, Randy had not been altogether right. This beautiful
room, these handsome, well-dressed people were not nearly so real as the
world outside. And it was that world, in which she would start her
search tomorrow, that stayed uppermost in her thoughts through the rest
of the dreamlike night with its dancing, its carriage ride around the
park and (or was this too a dream?) Randy’s gentle good-night kiss on
the steps of the Gramercy Arms.




                                  XIII
                           _The Hidden City_


When the list was completed, Peggy had found over forty theaters built
since 1890 and not currently listed as theaters in the classified phone
book. Now there was nothing to do except visit each one to see if it was
still there at all, and if there, to see what it was being used for.
Checking the addresses against her city map and street-number guide,
Peggy listed those that she would visit first.

“I’ve started out with a group I think we can cover in one afternoon,”
she explained to Amy. “And the district I’ve picked is not too far away
from most of the off-Broadway theaters in Greenwich Village. I’d like it
best if we could find a theater near where people are used to going, or
at least in districts that are easy to get to by bus or subway.”

“Don’t worry too much about that,” Greta commented from the depths of an
easy chair. “If you can just find a place to put on the play, and if the
play is good, people will come. Even if they have to walk, or pay
tremendous cab fares. That’s one wonderful thing about New York. People
love the theater, and they’re willing to go through all kinds of
hardships to see a good play.”

“The proof of that is the prices people pay to see a Broadway show,” Amy
agreed. “Six and eight dollars a seat for some of them!”

“And that’s at box-office prices,” Irene commented. “They pay
twenty-five dollars to a ticket broker sometimes to see a really popular
show. I think that the thing to be in this business is a broker, not an
actress. That’s where the big money is!”

“We’ll remember that when we get our theater,” Peggy said, laughing.
“I’ll put aside a whole lot of seats in my name, and if the show’s a hit
I’ll make a fortune on them!”

“No theater, no tickets,” Amy said dryly. “And no show either. We’d
better get going now.”

The area that Peggy had decided to cover first was a section south of
Fourteenth Street, and somewhat farther east than where they had been.
This was an old part of town, in which the theater had once been
centered even before it had moved “uptown” to Fourteenth Street.
(Fourteenth Street itself is now very much downtown from the present
theater district in the west Forties and Fifties.)

This old district had seen wave after wave of immigrants come from
various lands. Each nation had left its mark. There were Russian stores,
Rumanian restaurants, Irish bars, Jewish delicatessens, Italian grocery
stores, and Spanish shops of all sorts.

“It’s like looking at a cross section of certain kinds of rocks,” Peggy
said. “You know, the kinds that give you a million-year history of the
earth and the kinds of life that have come and gone. Finding all these
traces of different languages and peoples is sort of like geology.”

“Yes,” Amy agreed, “and you can tell pretty well which groups came to
the neighborhood first and which ones followed, and which are the
latest. I’d say the Irish were first, and then the Rumanians and the
Russians, a lot of whom were Jewish, and finally the Puerto Ricans. Look
at that store!”

She pointed to an old building with store windows lettered
“_Carnecería_,” which is Spanish for “butcher shop.” Over the windows
was a faded old signboard which the present tenants had neglected to
remove. Its gilt letters, nearly illegible, read, “A. Y. Ravotsky,
Inc.,” and on either side of the lettering, carved into the wood, was an
Irish shamrock and harp.

“It’s like a one-stop history of New York!” Peggy said. “I’ll bet if you
dug underneath it you’d find Dutch shoes and Indian arrowheads!”

A few blocks’ walk brought them to their first address. There was no
sign of a theater at all. In its place was a large, squat hospital; on
its cornerstone appeared the date it was built—1912.

“Well, that takes care of Hewett’s Theater,” Peggy said sadly, crossing
off the name on her list. “Now let’s try the Emperor. It’s only two
blocks away.”

The Emperor Theater was now effectively disguised as a Greek Orthodox
church, complete with a turnip-shaped steeple and a Russian signboard
outside. The next theater on the list was a large and gaudy caterer’s
hall, used for weddings, parties, lodge meetings, and dances, according
to its poster. The next two on the list had also totally disappeared,
giving way to a garage and an apartment house.

“This is hardly encouraging,” Amy said. “I somehow feel already that
we’re on a wild-goose chase.”

“Amy, this is no time to get discouraged!” Peggy said. “Why, we’ve only
gone to five places, and we’ve got nearly forty more on the list! And,
after all, it’s not as if we were looking for a dozen theaters. All we
want is one, so I don’t care if all but one prove to be shut or
converted. And we have to see them all, just in case it’s the last one
that turns out to be for us!”

“That makes sense,” Amy agreed, “and I certainly don’t want to quit.
It’s just that I wish we had hit it right the first time!”

“You’re a lazy girl,” Peggy reproached her. “Do you know the way I feel
about it? Even if we had found a good theater on our first call, I’d
still want to see everything else on the list, just to make sure that we
had the best one!”

After some more walking, in which they found two more missing theaters
and one that had been converted to a funeral parlor, they decided to
stop for lunch in a delicatessen where sausages of every shape and size
hung like decorations from the ceiling. They sat at a small table near
open barrels of pickles, pickled tomatoes, and sauerkraut and stuffed
themselves with corned-beef sandwiches on fresh, fragrant rye bread
dotted with caraway seeds, homemade potato salad, cole slaw, and
pickles. Afterward, they felt much better, and more heartened for the
rest of the day’s search.

As they worked their way downtown, the neighborhood began to change once
more, and the girls were unable to guess what might be the nationality
of the dark, strong-faced people they now saw about them. The signs on
the windows didn’t help either, being in a language they could not
identify.

It might have remained a mystery, had they not been stopped by a
policeman who said, “What are a couple of nice-looking girls like you
doing in the Gypsy section? This is no place to sight-see, you know. I’d
advise you to take a guided tour.”

“We’re not sight-seeing,” Peggy said. “We’re looking for an
address—actually for an old theater. Maybe you can help us. We want to
find the Burke Theater, if it still exists.”

The policeman was puzzled until Peggy showed him the address, and then
he smiled broadly. “Well, you might just as well forget it,” he said.
“It might have been a theater once, but not any longer. The Settlement
House has it now, and it’s the local boys’ club, complete with a
gymnasium equipped for every sport. It’s done a lot of good in this
neighborhood, I can tell you.”

Peggy and Amy thanked him, and then asked him about the Gypsies. They
hadn’t realized there were any in the city—or at least not enough to
make up a whole district.

“It’s not a large district,” he said. “No more than a thousand or so, at
the most. At least that’s what they say, but it’s not easy getting them
to hold still to be counted. They’re good people, once you get to know
them. Only they speak a language nobody can understand, and their ways
are different. If I were you, I wouldn’t hang around here much.”

Thanking him, the girls left, not without casting a few glances back
over their shoulders until they were sure they were clear of the area.

The remaining theaters on their first day’s list were to the west of the
Gypsy district, and these too proved to offer nothing. The district they
now found themselves in was on the outskirts of Chinatown, and was half
Chinese and half mixed-New-York. Of the theaters on the list for this
part of town, one had been at one time a Chinese movie house, and was
now a Rescue Mission. Signboards in rusty black with large white
lettering warned sinners to repent, and offered soup and bread to anyone
who attended the services. From inside, the girls heard some wheezy
voices and an even wheezier organ sounding the plaintive notes of a
hymn.

Peggy realized with a start that this was the Bowery, the sinister,
pathetic district inhabited by the poorest examples of humanity—those
who had almost resigned from the human race. Looking about her, she saw
tattered men in doorways, sleeping figures huddled under stairs, groups
of tough-looking tramps standing idly on street corners. She was
suddenly aware that she and Amy were the only women in sight.

“Amy,” she said in a shaky voice, “I’m afraid we shouldn’t have come
here! This is the Bowery, and you remember what the guide said about it
when we took that bus trip. He called it the worst district of the
city!”

“Oh dear!” Amy whispered, looking nervously about her. “What should we
do now?”

“I think we’d better go,” Peggy said. “Chinatown starts right across the
street, and I remember what the guide said about that, too. He said not
to believe all the old mystery stories; Chinatown is just about the
safest place in the city. The Chinese have practically no criminals
among them, and any tourist is safe there. Let’s go!”

Trying to look as inconspicuous as possible, and doing all they could to
avoid the appearance of hurrying, Peggy and Amy crossed the street and
turned into a narrow alley between two Chinese food shops whose windows
were filled with things that neither girl could identify.

Once more they were made aware of the sudden changeability of the city.
In no time at all, they were out of the frightening streets of the
Bowery and in the crowded, noisy, bright-colored center of Chinatown.
The streets, so narrow that in some places the sidewalks were scarcely a
foot wide, were lined with restaurants, gift shops, importing houses
that specialized in tea and spices, and more of the oddly stocked
Oriental groceries and markets. Somewhat shaken by their fear on the
Bowery, they stopped for tea and rice cookies in a large Chinese
restaurant, where they sat at a small table on a balcony overhanging the
main street of the district.

“I think we’d better stop looking for theaters today,” Peggy suggested.
“Besides, it’s after five-thirty now, and almost time for dinner. Why
don’t we look around some of the shops here, and then come back to this
restaurant for dinner? We can look for theaters again tomorrow.”

Amy agreed, but looked pained at the suggestion that they do more
searching the next day. “I don’t know how you can stand it,” she said.
“My feet are killing me from today’s walk. Why don’t we wait awhile?”

“Because tomorrow’s Sunday,” Peggy replied firmly, “and it’s our last
chance to get in a full day’s looking before next week. After-school
hours just aren’t enough. If we really want to check out this whole
list, we have to work weekends.”

Amy sighed. “My worst habit isn’t laziness,” she said, “it’s picking the
wrong kind of friends. If I had known, when we first met, how much
energy you have, I would have refused to know you!”




                                  XIV
                          _The Hidden Theater_


Sunday, like Saturday, produced one blank after another.

Peggy and Amy saw theaters that had been turned into television studios,
union halls, social clubs, and lodges; theaters converted to restaurants
and supermarkets; sites of theaters long vanished and forgotten now
occupied by office buildings, apartment houses or the blank-faced,
featureless warehouses that fill much of lower Manhattan.

On Monday, when their last class was over at two-thirty, Peggy once more
took up her list and her bundle of city maps and guides. “Let’s go,
Amy,” she said in tones of mixed determination and resignation. “We’ve
got a couple of hours this afternoon, and we might as well use them.”

“Why don’t we take the afternoon off?” Amy asked. “My feet are just
killing me, and I’m sure if I walk for another two hours I’ll come down
with an awful blister. We can look again tomorrow, after a day’s rest.”

Peggy considered the suggestion for a moment. It would be a relief to
take an afternoon off and just loaf about the house. But then she shook
her head. “No. If we don’t have any luck, we can take tomorrow off, but
I’d like to go out again today. There’s a meeting of the players tonight
at Connie’s, you know, and I’d love to be able to report that we found
something today. Let’s give it a try.”

“All right, Peggy,” Amy agreed, “if you’re game, so am I. And it would
be nice to have some good news for the gang tonight. I’m just afraid
that we’ll put a damper on the evening when we show up all tired out
with some more of our usual bad news.”

Peggy half agreed, but knew that if she gave in and let down her pace,
she might never again get up the kind of drive she had been working on
for the last week. With a deep breath and a determined expression, she
swept Amy off with her.

“The section we’re looking in today,” she explained as they walked to
the subway, “is a little west and south of Greenwich Village. It’s
mostly warehouses now, but there were once several theaters there, and
since there’s been almost no new construction in the area in the last
fifty years, there’s a chance that some of the theaters have been left
alone. I’m particularly interested in two of them that I think have a
better chance of being there than the others we’ve looked for.”

“Why should these two have a better chance?” Amy asked.

“The licenses show that there were several theaters built in the city at
one time in a way that got around the fire laws. The law said that you
couldn’t build a theater with any other kind of space over it, and with
land so expensive, it kept a lot of people from building theaters. So a
few smart builders put theaters on the top floors of office buildings,
and got more rentable space on their ground that way. I’ve found permits
for over a dozen of these top-floor theaters.”

“But why should they still be there,” Amy asked, “any more than any of
the other old theaters?”

“Two reasons,” Peggy answered. “In the first place, nobody would want to
convert a top-floor theater to a restaurant or a garage or anything like
that. And in the second place, the district we’re going to has
practically no apartment buildings in it, and that means that there
aren’t residents in the neighborhood to want to use a theater for a
social club or a church or a funeral parlor. I have a feeling that we’re
going to find our theater here, if we find it anywhere.”

Amy agreed with Peggy’s logic and further noted that, if they did find a
theater in this district, it would be a good location. There were two
subway lines that had stops on either side of the area, and several bus
lines as well.

These observations gave them a somewhat more cheerful outlook, and it
was with a renewed sense of anticipation that they came up from the
subway and started their search in this promising new district.

The streets in this part of town were narrow, and crowded with trucks
that were backed up at all angles to loading platforms that ran like
boardwalks along the fronts of the buildings. Most of the buildings were
produce markets where wholesale food merchants received the meats,
vegetables, fruits, and packaged goods that fed the city. Wide
protective canopies that overhung their fronts gave the loading
platforms the appearance of old-fashioned porches. Other buildings were
warehouses, obviously designed for storage. Their blank windowless walls
and heavy steel doors made them look like ancient fortresses. Here and
there, between these and the produce markets, stood the most familiar
kind of New York business building, the so-called “loft,” used for light
industry or, occasionally, offices. It was in front of one of these that
Peggy stopped.

“Here’s our first address,” she said. “According to my list, a theater
was licensed here by the original construction permit in 1892.”

Amy looked at the worn, red brick front, unconvinced. “A theater here? I
can’t imagine it! Maybe this place was built later, after the original
building with the theater was torn down.”

Peggy shook her head. “No, I don’t think so. I’ve gotten pretty good at
architecture in the last few days, and I think I can guess the date of a
New York building within a couple of years. This wasn’t built much later
than 1892. It must be the original building with the theater. Let’s see
if we can get any clue to it.”

The girls walked across the street in order to get a better view of the
building and, as soon as they turned to look, Peggy’s eyes lighted.
“Look up!” she said. “There’s a theater up there, all right!”

“How do you know?” Amy asked wonderingly.

“Look at the windows! The first five floors have windows all the same
height—a normal ceiling height. But the top floor has windows that must
be twenty feet high! That means that the ceiling height is over twenty
feet up there. What else could it be but the theater?”

“You must be right!” Amy agreed with excitement. “What do we do now?”

“Let’s see if there’s a janitor or anyone who can tell us about it; if
it’s being used, and what for. Even if someone’s using it, we might be
able to rent it from him if we can pay him more than he’s paying now.
Let’s go and look!”

They ran across the street and into the vestibule of the building, but
when Peggy tried the door, she found it locked. A small sign on the door
read O & O TRUCKING Co. And the same name was written over the bank of
mailboxes. Apparently there were no other tenants in the building, and
nobody seemed to be in the O & O offices.

“We can always write to them,” Amy suggested, “or we can try them on the
phone until we find someone in.”

“I guess we’ll have to,” Peggy agreed. But then she noticed the
doorbell, almost invisible under many layers of thick green paint. “Wait
a minute! Let’s see if the bell works. Maybe there’s a watchman, or
somebody else.”

                  [Illustration: The door swung open]

A push at the button produced a loud ringing from deep within the
building. Its sound seemed to echo for seconds after Peggy released the
button.

“If there’s anybody in there, that’s going to bring him,” she said.
After a few minutes’ wait, she decided to try again. This time, at the
same instant that she touched the doorbell, the door swung open,
revealing a man in dirty overalls who stood blinking at the light and
regarding them with a scowl.

“Whatta ya want?” he grated.

“Are you the superintendent?” Peggy asked politely.

“I’m the janitor. Whatta ya wanta know for?”

“Well, we’re just wondering about the theater upstairs—”

“Theater? Ain’t no theater here, kid,” the man growled, and started to
shut the door.

“Wait!” Peggy said, holding the door open. “There is a theater upstairs!
We know there is! All I want to know is what it’s used for.”

“It ain’t used for nothin’,” the janitor started angrily. Then he
stopped himself, remembering his first statement. “Besides, you got the
wrong place. Like I said, no theater here. Now beat it!” With an extra
push, he slammed the door shut, and Peggy and Amy once more were faced
with nothing more enlightening than the O & O sign.

“Why, I’ve never in my life seen such awful manners!” Amy said, almost
with a stamp of her foot. “I’m going to write to that company as soon as
we get home and tell them about—”

“Amy,” Peggy interrupted, “I think you’re getting excited about the
wrong thing. Let’s get away from here and talk this over.”

But before leaving the district, she crossed the street once more to be
sure that she was not mistaken about the building. Her second look
convinced her that she had been right. Those windows could only mean a
high-ceilinged room of some sort, and the license clearly stated that it
had been a theater.

“Amy, there’s just one thing to do now. We’ve got to check the city
records again, this time to see the plans of this building. Then, once
we’re sure it’s a theater, we’ve got some thinking to do before we act.”

“But why would that janitor say there was no theater there if there is
one?” Amy said.

“That’s the question,” Peggy agreed darkly. “I want to know why he said
that, and I want to know what the place is being used for.”

“But, Peggy,” Amy protested, “why should we go poking into other
people’s business? We already know that they’re not going to rent us
this theater, and that they’re downright unpleasant people. Why don’t we
just cross this one off, and go look at the others on your list?”

“Amy, you’re not thinking clearly,” Peggy said patiently. “It seems to
me that the only reason anyone would have for acting the way that
janitor did is that there’s something wrong going on in there—something
that makes it important for them to keep people out.”

“If that’s the case,” Amy said reasonably, “why did the janitor act so
suspiciously? If he had just said that the theater’s been converted to
some other use and isn’t for rent, we would have gone away and not
thought a thing about it.”

“That’s true,” Peggy agreed, “but I think we caught him off guard. After
all, it’s undoubtedly the first time anyone’s come around to ask him
about the theater, and he just didn’t know what to say. Besides, I don’t
think he’s very smart. He’s certainly not the man in charge of whatever
crooked business is going on in there.”

“If you’re sure it’s something crooked, why don’t we just report it to
the police?” Amy asked.

“We can’t go to the police with just our suspicions,” Peggy replied.
“They want some kind of indication that there’s something illegal before
they can investigate. In fact, I know they can’t even get a search
warrant without evidence. No, I’m afraid we’ll have to look into this on
our own.”

“But, Peggy,” Amy protested, “we’re supposed to be looking for a
theater, not playing cops and robbers!”

“This _is_ looking for a theater,” Peggy said intently. “If we uncover
something crooked going on in there, and if we can convince the police
of it, that building’s going to be vacant pretty soon. Come on! Let’s
dig up the plans for this place before the Bureau closes for the night!
I want to see what kind of stage the group is going to have to play on!”




                                   XV
                            _The Stage Door_


This time, knowing the name and address of the theater, and knowing
exactly what they were looking for, the girls had little trouble finding
the file set of plans for the theater, kept with the Fire Department as
a record of the seating plan, capacity, and exits.

Mason’s Starlight Theater, as the place had originally been called, had
a good working stage plan, not too wide, but with extraordinarily good
depth. It accommodated four hundred seats, which was a small auditorium
by Broadway standards, but larger than most of the off-Broadway houses.
Wing and fly space was generous, to allow for easy movement of scenery
off to the sides (or wings) or up on ropes and pulleys to the flies. The
dressing rooms were small, but they were well located. It seemed to Amy
and Peggy like the perfect jewelbox of a theater that they had dreamed
of since they had started their search.

The entrance to the theater, they found, was not through the street door
of the loft building, but down an L-shaped alley that ran alongside the
building and, when it turned, opened into a sort of courtyard. Playgoers
had been taken up to the top floor on an oversized freight elevator
which also had served for bringing in scenery and props, and which was
rated to carry fifty passengers at once. Two additional exits were
provided by fire-escapes outside the building. There was no way to enter
or leave the theater from the rest of the building, and the elevator
stopped only at the theater level. The loft floors were served by a
regular-sized passenger elevator reached through the front hall.

“Well, it looks just perfect,” Peggy said triumphantly. “Now all we have
to do is find out what it’s being used for, expose it, and move in when
the crooks move out!”

“I think you’re jumping to conclusions,” Amy said. “It seems to me that
the janitor might actually not have known about the theater. After all,
it can’t be reached through the building, and if he’s never been told
about the back elevator, or never been allowed to use it, he might not
know what’s up there.”

“Maybe,” Peggy said doubtfully, “but it seemed to me that he looked
awfully guilty about something. I’m sure he’s part of whatever’s going
on there.”

Amy protested. “That’s just the point! Maybe there’s nothing going on
there! Maybe the janitor doesn’t know about the theater, and it’s not
being used by crooks, but just sitting up there empty, gathering dust!
Wouldn’t that be wonderful?”

“It sure would,” Peggy agreed, “but I don’t think we’re that lucky. Of
course we could look up the name of the owner of the building and ask
him about the theater, but if it is a crooked game, and if the owner is
in on it.... No. I don’t think that’s the way to do it.”

“How do you think we should handle it, then?” Amy asked.

“I think we ought to go back to the place right now,” Peggy said,
“before it gets dark. I want to look around that back alley and theater
entrance just to see if we can pick up any clues. Then we’ll talk it
over with the boys and listen to their ideas.”

“I can believe that you’ll talk it over with them,” Amy laughed, “but I
have my doubts about your listening to anybody’s ideas! Still, I said
I’d go theater hunting with you, and I’m not going to back out now!”

By the time they had turned in their plans and charts to the file clerk
and returned to the loft-theater building, it was almost six o’clock.
Most of the trucks that had filled the streets were gone now, not to
return until after midnight, when the produce market would open for one
more business “day.” A few of the offices, small manufacturing
businesses and printing shops that filled the surrounding lofts, were
still open, judging by the lights in their windows, but for the most
part the streets and buildings were empty in the pearly twilight.

Making every effort to be inconspicuous, the girls ducked down the alley
to the rear courtyard entrance of the Starlight Theater. A miniature
marquee bearing the name “Mason’s” overhung a short flight of stairs
that led up to a loading platform, at the back of which was a wide, high
elevator door with pillars on either side. Above it, a plaster arch was
decorated with the twin masks of Comus—comedy and tragedy.

“Do you still think that the janitor didn’t know there was a theater in
the building?” Peggy whispered. “He’d have had to be blind as well as
dumb.”

Walking very quietly, the girls ascended the steps and approached the
huge elevator door. “Look!” Peggy whispered, pointing to the metal
doorsill. Amy nodded, clearly understanding the meaning of the bright
metal.

“It’s being used regularly,” Peggy said. “You can see where the sill is
dark and rusted toward the sides, and bright in the center, where people
have been walking over it.”

“And the lock!” Amy said. She and Peggy examined the heavy padlock that
secured the door to the frame by stout hasps. It was bright and clean,
of modern design and well-oiled. Any further doubts they might have had
were dispelled by examination of the door hinges, which were coated with
a heavy layer of fresh grease.

“Not only is the theater in use,” Peggy whispered, “but whoever is using
it is being awfully careful that he doesn’t make any noise opening and
shutting these doors. Are you convinced now?”

Amy nodded, wide-eyed. “I surely am. And I’m convinced that we’d better
get out of here before the man with the keys comes along! I’d hate to be
caught snooping around!”

Feeling not in the least as calm as she hoped she looked, Peggy motioned
Amy to wait while she took a last look around to be sure that there was
nothing she had missed. Then, her heart beating wildly, she and Amy left
the alley as cautiously as they had entered it. But neither of them felt
really safe until they were blocks away, and on their way to Connie’s
for the meeting of the players.

“We seem to be practically living in alleys,” Amy said as they let
themselves in through the street gate and started down the passage to
Connie’s little house.

“Yes, but I feel a lot better in this one than in the last,” Peggy said.
“When we get the theater, we’ll have to fix up that alley like this one,
with flower borders and lights to make it cheerful. We can fix up the
courtyard, too, with a little fountain and some garden seats and—”

“You’re awfully confident about getting that theater,” Amy interrupted.
“I hope that you’re not going to be disappointed.”

“I won’t be,” Peggy said. “I know that it was just meant for us, and I
mean to make sure that we get it!”

Connie let the girls in, and while they were saying hello to her and the
others, the buzzer announced the arrival of Tom Galen and Mona Downs.

“I’m so glad everyone’s here at once!” Peggy said. “We’re so full of
news that if we had to wait for anyone, I think we’d burst!”

“Don’t tell us you’ve found a theater!” Randy exclaimed.

“I will tell you,” Peggy answered, “because we did!”

“What’s wrong with it?” Mal asked.

“Where is it?” Connie said at the same time.

“And how much is it?” Randy put in, in the same instant.

“Whoa! One at a time!” Peggy protested. “If everybody will get settled
and hold the questions for a few minutes, I’ll tell you all about it.
Now,” she said, when the players were seated in expectant attitudes,
“now I’ll tell you everything you want to know. It’s called Mason’s
Starlight Theater; it’s on the top floor of a loft in the market area
southwest of Greenwich Village; we don’t know the rent; it’s a perfect
theater, just the right size, and—.”

“I feel a _but_ coming, rather than an _and_,” Randy said.

“Well, only a small _but_,” Peggy said. “The place happens to be in use
right now.”

“Great,” Mal said sarcastically. “You can now add your name to the long
list of those among us who have located perfect theaters that happen to
be in use!”

“Wait!” Peggy said. “This is different. In the first place, nobody will
admit to using it; in the second place, we think there’s something
crooked going on there; and if we do a little bit of detective work, I
think we can find out what it is. If I’m right, and if it’s being used
by crooks, we can get the theater for ourselves by getting the crooks
out!”

Their interest aroused by this unusual statement, the players began to
question Peggy and Amy about their suspicions and about the
circumstances that surrounded their discovery of the Starlight Theater.
When the girls had told them about their interview with the janitor, and
about their later visit to the alley behind the building, everyone
seemed convinced that there was something peculiar going on at the
place.

“The polished doorsill and the greased hinges and the new lock prove
that it’s being used,” Peggy concluded. “And the janitor’s attitude
seems to indicate that it’s being used for something illegal.”

“It sounds like an airtight case to me,” Pip said. “Why don’t we just
take the facts to the police and let them investigate?”

“Because there are no facts yet,” Peggy said. “All we have are guesses.
There must be thousands of places in use in the city, and thousands of
janitors who don’t want to be friendly and tell what they’re used for,
and I don’t think that the police would be willing to agree that they’re
all run by gangsters.”

“Peggy’s right. We can’t go to the police without more evidence,” Randy
said. “Before they’ll swear out a search warrant, we have to have
something more definite for them.”

“Then let’s get it!” Pip said with enthusiasm. “What do you suggest,
Peggy?”

“I think we ought to set up a lookout post in that back alley,” she
answered decisively. “There’s a place under the fire stairs on the far
side of the building where two people could hide and see without being
seen, and it shouldn’t take more than a couple of nights of looking to
find out what’s going on.”

“Why nights?” Randy asked. “They might be doing whatever it is they do
in the daytime, too. I’m afraid we’d have to set up a twenty-four-hour
watch to be sure of finding anything out.”

“I don’t think so, Randy,” Peggy argued. “If they were using the place
by day, they probably wouldn’t have taken so much care with the hinges.
What’s more, I’m sure the janitor was sleeping when we rang the bell,
which is why he took so long in answering it. I would guess that he
works at night with the rest of the gang. Besides, that neighborhood
would be perfect for night work. The markets are practically deserted
between six and midnight. Probably after midnight, when the markets open
up, the crooks run a legitimate trucking business as a cover-up.”

“The girl’s a positive Sherlock,” Mal said fondly. “Anyway, we can try a
few nights, and if nothing shows up, we can then worry about extending
the watch during the daytime as well.”

“When do we start?” Tom Galen asked.

“Tomorrow night,” Peggy said. “It’s too late to start tonight. We’d want
to be in the alley and under the stairs before it gets really dark.
Tomorrow Amy and I will stand watch, then—”

“Oh, no, you don’t!” Randy said. “You two have done your part in this.
The lookout work will be done by men!”

“You’re probably right,” Peggy said, outwardly reluctant to give in, but
secretly happy that she wouldn’t have to spend nights crouching under
those dark stairs and waiting for heaven only knew what.

“I’ll go tomorrow,” Pip said.

“I’ll go with you,” Tom Galen said. “We’d better go two at a time, at
least for the purpose of having two witnesses to anything we see.”

“Good. Randy and I will go the next night,” Mal said. “We can alternate
from there.”

Everything arranged, Mal tried to turn the group to the original purpose
of the meeting, which was to work on further readings of the play. He
soon realized that everyone was too keyed up to concentrate, and
canceled work for the night.

“I think, in fact, that we’d better forget about rehearsals entirely,”
he said, “at least until we have this theater business settled one way
or the other. For one thing, we’re going to need all the sleep we can
get on the nights that we’re not standing watch.”

Everyone agreed, and in varying states of tension and excitement, said
good night and parted, knowing that the next few days might be very,
very busy.




                                  XVI
                       _Understudies for Danger_


School the next day seemed almost unreal to Peggy. Or was it the dark
alley and the night watch to come that was the unreal thing? Considered
carefully, nothing seemed quite real, even her home and her parents in
the neat, orderly world of Rockport. A ride on Socks around the autumn
fields of Wisconsin would clear her mind, she thought, or just an hour
alone in her favorite thinking spot in the harness room.

Her thoughts, shuttling restlessly between the friendly barn and the
now-sinister alley, were definitely not on her work, which was a lecture
session on television acting technique.

At lunch in the park, the discussion centered on the night’s work that
waited for Pip and Tom Galen. It all seemed very melodramatic.

“I’ve arranged with Tom,” Pip was saying, “to meet me downtown a little
before six. We’re both going to wear black slacks and sweaters, and
we’ll take black gloves. That way, we ought to melt into the shadows
perfectly.”

“How about your faces?” Connie giggled. “Are you going to go in
blackface like a couple of Al Jolsons?”

“We considered it,” Pip said seriously, “but we decided that it wasn’t
necessary. If anyone comes, we’ll hold our gloved hands over our faces,
and look through our fingers.”

“I must say you’ve thought of everything,” Amy said in admiration.

“Everything,” Pip echoed gloomily, “except what to do if we get caught.
We even worked out something about that, but I don’t know how good it
is.”

“What have you worked out?” Peggy asked.

“We’re supposed to call Randy at one in the morning to tell him that
we’re going off duty. If we don’t call by then, he’s supposed to call
the police. Tomorrow night, he and Mal will call me at one.”

“That sounds sensible,” Peggy commented.

“Sure. Sensible. But if they catch us, say, at ten o’clock, we could be
in some pretty bad trouble by the time the police come around after
one.”

Feeling that this line of conversation was doing them no good at all,
Peggy tried, with little success, to change the subject. By the time
lunch was over and they had returned to the Academy, all four of them
felt thoroughly depressed.

Somehow, Peggy got through the afternoon.

And somehow, she got through the night, but it was scarcely a restful
one. She lay awake until one o’clock worrying about Pip and Tom, and
finally, at one-fifteen, called Randy. He answered at the first ring,
quite awake.

“Did they call?” she asked.

“At one o’clock sharp,” he assured her. “They haven’t seen anything at
all, and they’re perfectly all right. Now get some sleep. Good night.”

Feeling relieved, Peggy went back to bed, but it was not easy to sleep.
What had seemed such a good idea yesterday was beginning to seem foolish
today. The boys were engaging in unknown risks, and nobody knew what
dangers they might encounter. Perhaps they should have gone to the
police in the first place, and tried to convince them that something was
amiss. Perhaps they should still do so....

Finally, she slept, troubled by vague, unpleasant dreams.

The next day, her doubts grew stronger. Pip appeared at school late,
looking like a molting owl. He had rings under his eyes and seemed not
to have slept at all.

“We decided to stay on until daylight,” he explained wanly, “just in
case your idea that any action would take place between six and twelve
was wrong. Nothing happened, and we left at five-thirty in the morning.”

“But, Pip!” Peggy protested. “That’s a twelve-hour watch! You shouldn’t
be in school today!”

“It’s all right,” he assured her with a weak smile. “I’m rested. Slept
from six until nearly nine.”

He tackled his work gamely, but by noon agreed with Peggy that the
wisest course would be to cut school for the afternoon and go home to
sleep.

“Remember,” she cautioned him, “you have to set your alarm clock for one
in the morning, in case you don’t get a call from Randy and Mal.”

“I’m going to do better than that,” Pip said. “I’m going to shut off the
bell on my telephone so I can sleep straight through to midnight. Then
I’ll have the alarm wake me, so I can turn the phone on, and I’ll set
the alarm for one o’clock then.”

Pip left, somewhat unsteadily, and Peggy went to her afternoon class on
Elizabethan drama. She forced herself to concentrate, knowing that she
would have more than enough time that night to worry about the mystery
of the alley, and to speculate on what troubles the second night watch
might bring.


It was five-thirty and teatime at the Gramercy Arms when the troubles
began.

“Your redheaded boy friend’s on the phone for you, Peggy,” Greta
announced from the head of the stairs. “He sounds worried.”

Hurriedly putting down her teacup, Peggy ran from the kitchen and up to
the phone in the hall.

“Randy,” she said. “Is something wrong?”

“I’m afraid so, Peggy,” he answered. “Nothing serious, but I’m afraid
that Mal and I are going to be hopelessly late for our watch tonight,
and unless you want to take a chance on missing whatever action might
take place in the alley, Pip and Tom are going to have to cover it
again. At least for the first few hours.”

“What happened?” she asked. “Where are you?”

“It’s my car,” he answered. “I had to go out to my family’s place on
Long Island to get some stuff, and Mal came along for the ride. We
thought we’d have plenty of time, but on the way back, the car broke
down. We’re in the middle of nowhere, and the trouble will take at least
another hour to fix. That means that we couldn’t possibly be at the
alley until about seven-thirty, and, to tell the truth, eight or nine
would be more like it. Will you get hold of Pip and Tom and tell them
the sad news?”

Peggy agreed, wished him good luck with the car, and hung up.

Pip’s phone didn’t answer, and after ringing for several minutes, Peggy
remembered his decision to shut off the bell until midnight. She next
tried the midtown hotel where Tom Galen lived, but he was not in his
room, and the desk clerk had not seen him for several hours.

Hurrying downstairs to the kitchen and her now cold cup of tea, she
broke the news to Amy.

“Well, maybe nothing will happen before eight or nine,” Amy said
hopefully, but not looking too convinced.

“I’m afraid that if anything is going to happen, that’s just about the
time for it,” Peggy said. “The neighborhood doesn’t really empty out
until after six, and it starts to get busy again a little before
midnight. If I wanted to do any work in that alley, I think I’d plan to
arrive by eight and leave by ten, if it could be done.”

“Nothing happened last night,” Amy said, “so maybe nothing will happen
tonight either.”

“I’m going to have to disagree again. Just because nothing happened last
night, I think that we stand a better chance of seeing something
tonight. Judging from the used condition of that doorsill, whoever’s
using the place doesn’t let too much time go by between visits.”

“But what can we do about it?” Amy said. “With Randy and Mal out on Long
Island, and Pip and Tom unreachable, that leaves only us.”

“I know,” Peggy said firmly. “And that’s who’s going to go tonight!”

“Oh, Peggy! Do you think we ought to?” Amy asked. “I mean, it might be
dangerous, and we are a couple of girls, and....”

“This is no time to play the feminine Southern belle,” Peggy said. “We
have to go. And besides, there’s no danger. It’s not as if we’ll be
seen, or as if we meant to rush out and stop the crooks if we see them!
We’ll just hide under the stairs and watch. Anyway, even if you don’t
want to go, you can’t stop me.”

“That settles it,” Amy said with conviction. “You’re not going to go to
that place alone. When do we start?”

“Right now!” Peggy said eagerly. “It’s almost six o’clock, and we
haven’t got too much time to get there before it’s dark. Come on! We
have to get dressed for the occasion!”




                                  XVII
                           _Backstage Fright_


Peggy giggled uneasily as she and Amy inspected themselves in the hall
mirror before leaving the Gramercy Arms. “We look like a couple of
character actors dressed up for a skit on the Beat Generation.”

“Or like a couple of weird vampires from a horror movie,” Amy replied
with a nervous laugh.

Greta surveyed them critically. “At least you don’t have to worry about
anything,” she said acidly. “Those getups would frighten off any man in
the world. If the crooks do catch sight of you, all it’ll take is one
look before they scream and run!”

Both girls were dressed identically, having taken their cue from Pip in
the matter of appropriate clothes for playing detective in a dark alley.
They wore black skirts and sweaters, black stockings and black shoes.
They carried black gloves and black scarves. The scarf was necessary for
Amy to cover her bright, blond hair, and Peggy thought it was a good
idea for her to take one, too, as a face covering. Neither wore any
jewelry at all, so there would be nothing to rattle or jingle or catch
the light.

“If we’re not back by morning,” Peggy said wryly, “send out the
bloodhounds for us.”

“I’m waiting up for you,” Greta said. “And if you’re not back by
one-thirty, the first bloodhound to pick up your trail is going to be
me. With an appropriate police escort,” she added.

“Don’t worry,” Peggy said. “We’ll be all right. Just wish us luck, and
we’ll be on our way.”

“All right, then. Good luck,” Greta said, opening the door for them. “I
just hope the police don’t pick you up, for looking like suspicious
characters.”

Peggy and Amy left, feeling a little foolish about their costumes, but
after walking for a block or two, they realized that nobody was even
looking at them.

“That’s the wonderful thing about New York,” Peggy said. “You can wear
anything, or do anything, and nobody seems to care as long as you don’t
disturb the peace.”

Amy nodded in agreement. “The other day I noticed a man with a beard
down to his waist. He was wearing a long Biblical-looking white robe and
a pair of sandals, and nobody on the street was paying the least bit of
attention to him. Just try to picture him passing unnoticed in Pine
Hollow or in Rockport!”

“Just try to picture us passing unnoticed in Pine Hollow or in
Rockport!” Peggy laughed. “We’d probably have a crowd of people and
barking dogs and small boys throwing stones by now!”

The driver scarcely glanced at them as they boarded a bus.

“I suppose it’s nice to know that nobody bothers about you in New York,”
Peggy said when they were seated, “but in a way it’s kind of scary. I
mean, supposing something were to happen to us, do you think that anyone
would even notice it if we screamed?”

Amy shivered. “I know what you mean,” she said. “I suppose a lot of
people would notice it, and then they’d just put it out of their minds
and do nothing about it. They’d just figure it was none of their
business, after all, and go right on doing what they were doing.”

The thought was not a happy one, and both girls lapsed into a tense
silence as the bus bore them downtown into the deepening twilight.

They got off in a district of office buildings, shops, and showrooms,
all dark now. The streets were empty, save for an occasional car or taxi
and the taillights of their bus, receding in the distance. As they
turned to the west, down a narrow side street, the street lights came
on. They seemed to accentuate the darkness rather than relieve it. The
girls hurried on past closed doors and shuttered windows. Each block
they walked brought them past older and lower buildings. The smell of
the river was brought to them by an incoming mist. Somewhere in the
distance a foghorn sounded two short, mournful blasts and then was
still.

They were in the market and warehouse district now. Parked trucks stood
silently by darkened loading docks, and shadows crouched behind tall
stacks of crates and boxes. One shadow suddenly detached itself from the
rest and shot by them with a wail! Peggy’s heart leaped and she clutched
Amy’s arm before she realized it was only an alley cat.

   [Illustration: One shadow suddenly detached itself from the rest]

“A cat!” she exclaimed, her voice trembling in mixed fear and relief.
“Just a cat! Oh dear, if I let that sort of thing scare me, I’m not
going to be much good tonight!”

“I ... I was frightened, too,” Amy said. “It was so sudden! We’ll
probably see more of them here, chasing the rats that must live around
these food markets. We’d better get used to it.”

But the thought of rats did nothing to calm Peggy’s nerves, or Amy’s
either. What if, in the alley behind the theater, rats should come? What
if they should come at the same time as the crooks? What if, under the
fire stairs, there should come a quiet scratching...? Peggy wondered if
she would be able to keep her silence then.

But they were near the theater alley now, and Peggy resolutely put her
fear of rats out of her mind. Let’s just worry about one thing at a
time, she told herself. The street was deserted, as she had hoped it
would be, and they were able to slip into the alley unobserved.

They walked cautiously, taking care with each step. If there was any
work going on in the alley now, this would be no time to disturb it.
Before turning the corner into the back court, they paused and listened
for what seemed a very long time. Not a sound disturbed the night. The
immediate silence was so perfect that they could hear, far in the
distance, the never-ending rumble and stir of the city, the growl of
subways and motors, the far-off drone of airplanes.

They turned into the empty courtyard, darted noiselessly for the fire
stairs and crouched in the shadows, their hearts drumming loudly and the
blood roaring in their ears like the noise of the distant subways.

It was some time before they felt calm enough to take stock of their
position. The fire stair was, as Peggy had told the boys, a perfect
place to hide. Most of it mounted out of sight in an airshaft on the
side of the building opposite the entrance alley. Only the last six
steps came out into the court, having turned the corner of the building
at a landing. The space below the landing made a cramped little lean-to,
protected by the steps themselves on one side and by a latticework of
metal on the other. The space was open only in the rear, from which
direction nobody could approach them.

The steps themselves were steel, and the risers between the steps were
of the same metal grillwork as that on the side. It was almost
impossible for anyone to see into the shadowed cubbyhole behind the
grill, but quite an easy matter for the girls to see out.

“I think we’re safe enough here,” Peggy whispered, tactfully restraining
herself from adding, “as long as no rats come around.”

“It seems safe,” Amy agreed, “but I wouldn’t exactly call it
comfortable. It’s too low to stand in, and I hate the thought of sitting
down on the dirt that’s collected here. There’s a box out there in the
courtyard. Why don’t we bring it in to sit on?”

“Better not,” Peggy answered. “Someone may remember having seen it
there, and if it’s missing, it might give them the idea that somebody’s
been here. And we don’t want anyone to get ideas like that.”

Amy agreed reluctantly with the sense of Peggy’s argument, and shifted
her position. “No wonder Pip was so tired,” she whispered. “A whole
twelve hours of crouching like this must be a terrible thing to go
through! We’ve only been here for about fifteen minutes, and I’m
beginning to get pins and needles already.”

The next hour and a half, spent mostly in silence, and in trying to get
used to the cramped position beneath the stairs, passed by with terrible
slowness. Every so often, the roar of a truck would be heard in the
street, and the girls would grow tense, waiting for it to turn into the
alley. But it always went by, leaving an even deeper silence behind it.

“It’s almost time for Randy and Mal to come,” Peggy whispered. “I don’t
envy them their night, but I’ll sure be glad to get out of here!”

“So will—quiet! I hear another truck,” Amy said.

Quietly shifting into new positions of comparative comfort, the girls
held their breath and waited to hear the sound of the truck passing the
alley. But this one didn’t pass.

A bright beam of headlights swept down the alley and lighted up the
court as the truck turned in off the street.

“Those headlights!” Peggy whispered. “When they turn the corner into the
court, they’re bound to light up this whole stairway!”

“Just hope the driver doesn’t look this way!” Amy whispered in return.

But before the truck came into sight, the headlights were switched off,
and the driver came in under the soft glow of the parking lamps. The
truck was an ordinary-looking, box-body affair, a little shabby, dented,
and in need of both a washing and a paint job. Faded, once-gold letters
high up on its side read “O & O TRUCKING Co.” The forlorn appearance of
the truck was belied by the soft, powerful sound of its well-tuned
engine as it turned into the alley and was expertly backed up to the
loading platform.

Two men silently leaped out of the cab and carefully closed the doors.
Moving on rubber-soled shoes, they climbed onto the platform, unlocked
the rear doors of the truck and swung them back. A third man, holding a
rifle in his hand, stepped out of the truck.

“Okay,” he said quietly. “You get the stuff out, and I’ll keep watch.”

He jumped lightly down and stationed himself at the corner by the alley,
his rifle held ready, while the other men unlocked the elevator doors
and opened them.

They worked swiftly and quietly in the darkness, which was relieved only
by a very dim work light mounted in the truck body. By its pale glow,
Peggy and Amy saw only an anonymous series of boxes being transferred
from the truck to the elevator. There was no way to tell what they held
but, Peggy thought, it couldn’t have been anything legal—not if it had
to be loaded secretly at night and under an armed guard.

Thinking of the armed guard, she suddenly shivered with fright as a new
thought came to her. The boys! Randy and Mal! What if they should choose
this moment to make their appearance? The man with the rifle stood
motionless and poised for action. Peggy was sure he would not hesitate
to shoot anyone who walked into that alley. Biting her lip and holding
tightly to the steel support of the stair, she prayed that Randy’s
engine would give him more trouble, or that they would run into heavy
traffic or want to stop for dinner or ... or anything! Anything to keep
them from coming here until the truckmen had finished their business and
gone.

At least she was not kept long in suspense. The men were quick and
efficient, and their cargo was not a very large one. In a very few
minutes, the elevator was loaded and, with a smooth whir not at all like
the Academy elevators, it ascended to the theater. It returned not long
after, emptied of its crates, and the workmen shut off the mechanism,
swung the doors closed, and clicked the lock on them.

The watchman with the rifle nodded his approval, climbed back into the
rear of the truck and once more allowed himself to be locked in. Without
a word, the truckmen took their places in the cab, soundlessly shut the
doors, and the battered truck swung smoothly into the courtyard, backed
up, and turned down the alley.

It seemed like the first time in ten minutes that Peggy had breathed.

“I was frightened to death that the boys would come!” she said.

“That’s all I could think of, too,” Amy whispered in a shaky voice.

“Now all I want is for them to come fast!” Peggy said. “We’ve got all
the evidence we need for the police, I think, and I just want to get out
of here!”

“If we do get this theater for our play,” Amy said, “I wonder if I’ll
feel good about it. I’m afraid I’ll never feel quite right about this
place after tonight!”

“Oh, we’ll make it all over,” Peggy said with enthusiasm. “We’ll put
bright lights in the little marquee, and we’ll put up lighted theater
posters on the walls, and I think we could paint the wall behind the
loading platform white with gilt trim on the pillars on each side of the
elevator. Then, if we can find a fountain for the court, the way I
suggested before, and maybe a few stone benches, we—Oh!” She gave a
start of fright as a male voice laughed close to her ear.

“Just like a woman!” Randy said. “Supposed to be keeping a lookout, and
you’re decorating an alley! But where are Pip and Tom? And what are you
doing here? And—”

“We’ll tell you everything over coffee,” Peggy said. “Oh, Randy! It’s
all over! We’ve got our crooks—and they’re crooks all right—and we’ve
got our theater, I’m sure—and I’m so glad you didn’t come ten minutes
earlier, and.... Oh, let’s get out of here!”

“Let’s,” Mal said. “This is hardly my idea of a place for a date! Amy,
take my arm. I have a feeling you need it. And Randy, get a firm grip on
Peggy, if you please.”

“Stop directing, Mal,” Randy laughed. “I think I’ve already written this
scene quite nicely, and the hero has the heroine well in hand!”




                                 XVIII
                            _Forecast—Fair!_


Seated at the desk in her room, Peggy selected a fresh sheet of paper.
She was on the fifth page of a letter to her friend Jean Wilson.


So you see I was right. There _were_ crooks using the theater all the
time. The next day, Amy and I told the police what we had seen in the
alley, and I think they were really pleased, even though they did bawl
us out for poking around in police affairs. At that, they admitted that
if we had come to them the first time with nothing but suspicions, they
probably wouldn’t have been able to do anything. Anyway, they put a
guard under the stairs and stationed some more policemen around, and two
nights later they caught the gang.

It seems they were hijackers, which means that they held up trucks on
the road and stole valuable cargo from them. They were using the theater
as a warehouse for the stolen goods until they could dispose of them in
whatever way crooks get rid of stolen goods. When the police searched
the place, they found thousands and thousands of dollars’ worth of furs
and silverware and liquor and appliances and all sorts of things. The
cartons that we saw them unload the night we were there turned out to
contain nylon stockings, and they were worth about twenty thousand
dollars, which is an awful lot of nylon stockings.

The police say we’re going to get a big reward from the insurance
people. The boys wanted to give it all to me, but I refused it. I’m
going to give it to the players’ group, which really means to Randy and
Mal, to rent the theater on a long-term lease and to fix it up properly.
They said once before that they didn’t want to be in the real estate
business, but I think that they’re changing their minds about that.

The police got in touch with the owner of the building, who is retired
and has been living in Florida for a long time. He didn’t know anything
about what was going on in the theater and was quite grateful that we
had gotten his crooked tenants out of the place. It seems he has been so
long away from the New York real-estate scene, that he didn’t know his
property was in demand as a theater. He says it hasn’t been used as one
for over fifty years! Of course, he could get more money renting it as a
theater than as a warehouse, but he says he doesn’t need more money, and
we need a theater. He has offered it to us on a ten-year lease for the
same rent he was getting before.

Randy says that the rent is so low that even a moderately successful
season would give him and Mal enough profit to live on comfortably, so
they’re now beginning to talk about becoming managers, doing their own
shows and, when they don’t happen to have a show for a particular
season, renting the theater to other groups.

What’s more, the rent covers the whole building, and the boys are
thinking of turning part of it into apartments for themselves, and the
rest of it into apartments for other young actors, something like a
Gramercy Arms for boys!

Incidentally, the theater is beautiful. The police let us in to take a
look at it today, and even with all those boxes and crates and fur coats
and things stacked around, we could see how nice it is. It’ll need new
seats, I’m afraid, and a new lighting system and a switchboard and a
curtain and loads of other things, but the reward money will more than
cover all that. And we even have a name for it—the Penthouse Theater.
How does that strike you? I only hope you can come to New York to see it
when it’s all ready.

Or, better than that, plan to come to New York next season when, with
luck, I might have a part in a play there. One of the things I like best
about Randy and Mal is that, even though they’re just bursting with
gratitude and they keep calling me a heroine, they haven’t tried to ‘pay
me off’ by offering me a part in the play. I’m still going to help just
by painting scenery and selling ads in the program and running errands
and things like that. This way, I know that if I ever get a part in one
of their plays, it will be because I deserve it as an actress.

Another thing I like about Randy is that he’s coming to take me out
again tonight. Which reminds me—I’d better sign off now, before Irene
and Amy install themselves in the bathrooms!

Do you suppose that’s what they mean when they say that one of the most
important things for an actress to learn is timing?

                                                     More next time from
                                                                   Peggy

                       [Illustration: Endpapers]


                       [Illustration: Back cover]




                        PEGGY FINDS THE THEATER


As far back as she can remember, Peggy Lane—young, pretty, and
talented—has wanted to become an actress. Ambitious but realistic, Peggy
knows her name isn’t going to be in lights immediately but finally
persuades her cautious parents to let her spend a year in New York to
try to gain a foothold in the fabled world of the theater.

Peggy’s first big test is an audition at the New York Dramatic Academy,
whose eccentric director will decide whether she shows sufficient
promise to be accepted for professional training. Meanwhile, Peggy
becomes friends with Randy Brewster, a young playwright, and Mal Seton,
who will direct Randy’s experimental play if and when they can find an
off-Broadway theater in which to produce it. Peggy eagerly volunteers to
help in their desperate search and, exploring the byways of the city for
a forgotten theater, unwittingly stumbles into a mysterious and
dangerous situation.

The launching of Peggy’s career, her struggle to make her dreams become
a reality, is a delightful and heart-warming story.


                      _Peggy Lane Theater Stories_

                        Peggy Finds the Theater
                        Peggy Plays Off-Broadway
                          Peggy Goes Straw Hat
                           Peggy on the Road


                      _Peggy Lane Theater Series_

                           By VIRGINIA HUGHES

                       [Illustration: Back cover]

Peggy Lane, the young heroine of this exciting new series, is an
aspiring and talented actress. Her adventures as a drama student in New
York City, and her slow climb to success, with dedicated young theater
people like herself, make the theme of this inspiring new career series
for girls.

  1 PEGGY FINDS THE THEATER
  2 PEGGY PLAYS OFF-BROADWAY
  3 PEGGY GOES STRAW HAT
  4 PEGGY ON THE ROAD

                 GROSSET & DUNLAP _Publishers_ NEW YORK




                          Transcriber’s Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original—this e-text is public
  domain in the country of publication.

--In the text versions, delimited italics text in _underscores_ (the
  HTML version reproduces the font form of the printed book.)

--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.







End of Project Gutenberg's Peggy Finds the Theatre, by Virginia Hughes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PEGGY FINDS THE THEATRE ***

***** This file should be named 55933-0.txt or 55933-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/9/3/55933/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The collected works of William Hazlitt,
Vol. 1 (of 12), by William Hazlitt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The collected works of William Hazlitt, Vol. 1 (of 12)

Author: William Hazlitt

Editor: A. R. Waller
        Arnold Glover

Other: W. E. Henley

Release Date: November 11, 2017 [EBook #55932]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLECTED WORKS--WILLIAM HAZLITT, VOL 1 ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                                  THE
                   COLLECTED WORKS OF WILLIAM HAZLITT
                           IN TWELVE VOLUMES


                               VOLUME ONE




                         _All rights reserved_

[Illustration:

  _William Hazlitt._

  _Aged 13.
  from a Miniature on Ivory
  Painted by his Brother._
]




                         THE COLLECTED WORKS OF
                            WILLIAM HAZLITT

                EDITED BY A. R. WALLER AND ARNOLD GLOVER

                        WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
                              W. E. HENLEY

                                   ❦

                            The Round Table

                    Characters of Shakespear’s Plays

                   A Letter to William Gifford, Esq.

                                   ❦

                                  1902
                        LONDON: J. M. DENT & CO.
                   McCLURE, PHILLIPS & CO.: NEW YORK




     Edinburgh: T. and A. CONSTABLE, (late) Printers to Her Majesty

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                CONTENTS


                                                                   PAGE

 INTRODUCTION BY WILLIAM ERNEST HENLEY                               vii

 EDITORS’ PREFACE                                                  xxvii

 THE ROUND TABLE                                                    xxix

 CHARACTERS OF SHAKESPEAR’S PLAYS,                                   165

 A LETTER TO WILLIAM GIFFORD, ESQ.,                                  363

 NOTES                                                               415




                              INTRODUCTION


Hazlitt’s father, a minister in the Unitarian Church, was the son of an
Antrim dissenter, who had removed to Tipperary; Hazlitt’s mother was the
daughter of a Cambridgeshire yeoman; so that there is small room for
wonder if Hazlitt were all his life distinguished by a fine
pugnaciousness of mind, a fiery courage, an excellent doggedness of
temper, and (not to crack the wind of the poor metaphor) a brilliancy in
the use of his hands unequalled in his time, and since his time, by any
writing Englishman. Of course, he was very much else; or this monument
to his genius would scarce be building, this draft to his credit would
have been drawn for To-Morrow on To-Day. But, while he lived, his
fighting talent was the sole thing in his various and splendid gift that
was evident to the powers that were; and, inasmuch as he loved nothing
so dearly as asserting himself to the disadvantage of certain
superstitions which the said powers esteemed the very stuff of life,
they did their utmost to dissemble his uncommon merits, and to present
him to the world at large as a person whose morals were deplorable,
whose nose was pimpled, whose mind was lewd, whose character would no
more bear inspection than his English, whose heart and soul and taste
were irremediable, and who, as he persisted in regarding ‘the Corsican
fiend’ as a culmination of human genius and character, must for that
reason especially—(but there were many others)—be execrated as a public
enemy, and stuck in the pillory whenever, in the black malice of his
corrupt and poisonous heart, he sought, by feigning an affection for
Shakespeare, or an interest in metaphysics, to recommend his vulgar,
mean, pernicious personality to the attention of a loyal, God-fearing,
church-going, tax-paying, Pope-and-Pretender-hating British Public. I
cannot say that I regret the very scandalous attacks that were made on
Hazlitt: since, if they had not been, we should have lacked some
admirable pages in the _Political Essays_ and _The Spirit of the Age_,
nor should we now be privileged to rejoice in the dignified and splendid
savagery of the _Letter to William Gifford_. And, if I do not regret
them for myself and the many who think with me, still less can I wish
them wanting for Hazlitt’s sake; for if they had been, who shall say how
dull and how profitless, how weary and flat and stale, some years of
what he described, in his last words to his kind, as ‘a happy life’—how
mean and beggarly may not some days in these years have seemed? But
there is, after all, a reason for being rather sorry than not that
Hazlitt’s polemic was so brilliant, his young conviction so unalterably
constant, his example so detestable as it seemed to the magnificent
ruffian in _Blackwood_ and the infinitely spiteful underling in _The
Quarterly_. The British Public of those days was a good, hard-hitting,
hard-drinking, hard-living lot; and, in the matter of letters, there was
no guile in it. It read its Campbell, its Rogers, its Moore, its Hook
and Egan and Jon Bee; it accepted its convinced and pedantic sycophant
in Southey, its gay, light-hearted protestant in Leigh Hunt; it nibbled
at its Wordsworth, knew not what to make of its Coleridge, swallowed its
Cobbett (that prince of pugilists) as its morning rasher and toast; it
made much of Hone, yet was far from contemptuous of Westmacott; it laid
itself open to its Scott and its Byron, Michael and Satan, the Angel of
Acceptance and the Angel of Revolt. Withal it was essentially a Tory
Public: a public long practised in fearing God and honouring the King;
with half an ear for Major Cartwright and his like, and a whole mind for
the story of Randal and Cribb; honestly and jovially proud of Nelson and
‘The Duke,’ but neither loving the Emperor nor seeking to understand
him. Now, to Hazlitt the Revolution was humanity _in excelsis_, while
the Emperor, being democracy incarnate, and so a complete expression of
character and human genius, was as his god. Gifford, then, and Wilson,
had small difficulty in blasting Hazlitt’s fame, and in so far ruining
Hazlitt’s chance that ’tis but now, after some seventy years, that he
takes his place in literary history as the hero of a Complete Edition.
In the meanwhile he has had praise, and praise again. But it has come
ever from the few, and he has yet to be considered of the general as a
critic of many elements in human activity, a master of his
mother-tongue, and one, and that one not the least, in an epoch
illustrious in the achievement of Keats and Shelley and Wordsworth, the
inimitable Cobbett, Byron and Sir Walter, Coleridge, the Arch-Potency
(who, ‘prone on the flood’ of failure, ever ‘lies floating many a
rood’), and the thrice-beloved Lamb.


                                   I

The elder Hazlitt was trained in Glasgow. A man of spirit and
understanding, an active and a vigilant minister, he married Grace
Loftus, the Wisbech yeoman’s daughter, in 1766; and in 1778 (he being
much older than she), the last of their children, their son William, was
born to them at Maidstone. Five years later this son accompanied his
parents to Philadelphia. There the elder Hazlitt preached and lectured
for some fifteen months; but in 1786–87, having meanwhile established
the earliest Unitarian church in America, he returned to England, and
settled at Wem, in Shropshire, which was practically Hazlitt’s first
taste of native earth. A precocious youngster, well grounded by his
father, himself a man of parts and reading,[1] he was responsible as
early as 1792 for a _New Theory of Criminal and Civil Jurisprudence_,
and at fifteen he went to the Unitarian College at Hackney, there to
study for the ministry. But his mind changed. In the meantime he learned
something of literature, something of metaphysics, something of
painting, something (I doubt not) of life; the Revolution blazed out,
Bonaparte fell falconwise upon Austrian Italy, and approved himself the
greatest captain since Marlborough; there was a strong unrest in time
and the destiny of man; the ambitions of life were changed, the
possibilities and conditions of life transformed. The skies thrilled
with the dawn of a new day, and Hazlitt: already, it is fair to
conjecture, at grips with that potent and implacable devil of sex which
possessed him so vigorously for so many years; already, too, the devout
and militant Radical, the fanatic of Bonaparte, he remained till the
end: was no longer for the pulpit. And at this moment existence was
transfigured for him also. In the January of 1798, Coleridge, that
embodied Inspiration, visited the elder Hazlitt at Wem, and preached his
last (Unitarian) sermon in the chapel there. He was at his best, his
freshest, his most copious, his most expressive and persuasive; he had
the poet’s eye, the poet’s mouth, the poet’s voice, impulse, authority,
style; he had already ‘fed on honey-dew, and drunk the milk of
Paradise’; and he carried Hazlitt clean off his legs. To the sombre,
personal, scarce lettered but very thoughtful youth this voluble and
affecting Apparition was the bearer of a revelation. He listened to
Coleridge as to a John Baptist. He dared to talk metaphysics, and was so
far rewarded for his valour as to be encouraged to persevere.[2] What
was of vastly greater importance, he was asked to Stowey in the spring
of the same year: an event from which he dated the true beginnings of
his intellectual life.

In that centre of enchantment he stayed three weeks. It was a Golden
Year. Hazlitt was drunk throughout with what I should like to call
Neophytism. Coleridge was magnificent—elusive, archimagian,
irresistible; Wordsworth was opinionated but sublime; at intervals, as
in Sir Richard Burton’s _Thousand Nights and a Night_, they ‘repeated
the following verses.’ It was a time—O, but it was a time! A time of
ecstasy: ‘When proud-pied April was in all his trim,’ and even ‘heavy
Saturn’ must have laughed, if only to keep his yoke-fellow, Wordsworth,
in company; Wordsworth with his thick airs, and his luminous Belt, and
his dull but steady-going group of Moons! A time of gold, I say; yet had
it a most strange outcome. In 1798 Coleridge and Wordsworth were
Revolutionaries in everything: they looked to France for liberty, for
change, for a shining and enduring example. Hazlitt was with them now
and here: his also was a revolutionary soul, he also was of a mind with
Danton, he also looked to France for leading and light, he also held the
assault delivered upon France for an assault against Freedom. But
Coleridge and Wordsworth changed their minds, and readjusted their
points of view; and he did not. They loved not Bonaparte; and he did.
And the end of it was that, so far as I know, he never wrote with so
ripe and sensual a gust: not even, to my mind, when he was merely
annihilating Gifford: as when, long years after Nether-Stowey, he broke
in upon the strong, solid hold of Wordsworth’s egotism, and tore to
tatters—tatters which he flung upon the wind—the old, greasy prophet’s
mantle,[3] which Coleridge had sported to so little purpose for so many
years. To Hazlitt, the dissenter born, the deeply brooding, the
inflexible—to Hazlitt, I say, these Twin-Stars of the Romantic Movement
were common turn-coats; and he dealt with them on occasion as he thought
fit. But he never lost his interest in them; and when it comes to a
comparison between Wordsworth, the renegade, and Byron, the leader of
storming-parties, the captain of forlorn-hopes, then is his idiosyncrasy
revealed. He hacks and stabs, he jibes and sneers and denies, till there
is no Byron left, and the sole poet of the century is the ‘gentlemanly
creature—reads nothing but his own poetry, I believe,’—whose best
passages, in a moment of supreme geniality, he once likened, not to
their advantage, to those of ‘the classic Akenside.’


                                   II

It was from Nether-Stowey that Hazlitt dated his regard for poetry. But
if literature came late to him, as (his father’s office and his own
metaphysical inklings aiding) it did, he ever cherished a pure and
ardent passion for it, once it had come. Yet he was by no means widely
read, and in his last years seldom finished a new book. First and last,
indeed, he was a man of few books and fewer authors. Shakespeare, Burke,
Cervantes, Rabelais, Milton, the _Decameron_, the _Nouvelle Héloïse_ and
the _Confessions_, Richardson’s epics of the parlour and Fielding’s
epics of the road—these things and their kind he read intensely; and,
when it pleased him to speak of them, it was ever in the terms of
understanding and regard. Yet it was long ere he had any thought of
writing; and it was necessity alone that made him a man of letters. In
the beginning, the Pulpit proving impossible, he turned to painting for
a career, and, after certain studies, presumably under his elder brother
John,[4] and possibly under Northcote, he went to the Paris of the First
Consul, and painted there for some four months in a Louvre which the
thrift of Bonaparte had stored with the choicest plunder in Italian Art.
I know not whether or no he could ever have been a painter. Haydon, who
neither loved nor understood him, and was, besides, a man who could
greatly dare and ‘toil terribly’—Haydon says that he was at once too
lazy and too timid ever to succeed in painting: an art in which, as
Haydon showed, and as Millet was presently to say, ‘You must flay
yourself alive, and give your skin.’[5] I do not think that Hazlitt was
daunted by what may be called the painfulness of painting; for in
letters he was soon enough to prove that he had in him to face a world
in arms, and to tincture his writings, if need were, with the best blood
of his heart. In any case, after divers essays at copying in the
Louvre,[6] and certain attempts at portraiture on his return to
England,[7] he found that he could not excel; that, in fact, he was
neither Titian nor Rembrandt, nor could he even be Sir Joshua. So he
painted no more, but went on _reading_ certain painters: very much, I
assume, as he went on taking certain authors; because he loved them for
themselves, and found emotions—and not only emotions, but
sensations[8]—in them.

His ideals are Claude, Rembrandt, Raphael, Poussin, Titian; he gives you
very gentlemanly and intelligent estimates of Watteau and Velasquez; he
has an eye—a right one—for Rubens and Van Dyck; he exults in Jan Steen,
has words of worth for Ruysdael and Hobbima, and gives Turner as neat a
_croc-en-jambe_ as you could wish to see. But, despite his training and
his gift, he is no more in advance of his age than the best of us here
and now. To him the Carraccis and Salvator are _sommités_ of a kind; if,
so far as I remember, he will have nought to do with Carlo Dolci, he
will not do without his Guido; I have read no word of his on Lawrence,
no word of his on Constable, none on Morland; on Hogarth he is chiefly
literary, on Turner not much more than diabolically ingenious. Wisely or
not, he took pictures as he took books: they might be few, but they must
be good; and, not only good but, of (as he believed) the best. If they
were not, or if they were new, he drew them not to his heart, nor
adorned the chambers of his mind with them. Those chambers were filled
with good things long since done. To him, then, what were the best
things doing? It was his habit to take the good thing on; savour its
excellences to their last sucket; meditate it strictly, jealously,
privily, longingly; say, if it must be so, a few last words about
it—some for the painter, more for the man of letters;[9] and then...?
Well, then he accepted the situation. I do not know that he cared much
for Keats; I do know that he found Shelley impossible, that he was never
an exalted Wordsworthian, and that he hesitated—(ever so little, but he
hesitated!)—even at Charles Lamb. Politics and all, in truth, he was a
prophet who adored the past, and had but an infidel eye for the promise
of the years. He was interested only in the highest achievement; and to
be the highest even that must lie behind him. Thus, Fielding was good,
and Rubens; Sir Joshua was good, and so were Richardson and Smollett;
so, likewise, Shakespeare was good, and Raphael and Titian were
good—these with Milton and Rembrandt, and Burke and Rousseau and
Boccaccio; and it was well. Well with them, and well—especially
well!—with him: they had achieved, and here was he, the perfect lover,
to whom their achievement was as an enchanted garden, a Prospero’s
Island abounding in romantic and inspiring chances, unending marvels,
miracles of vision and solace and pure, perennial delight. And if these,
the ‘Thrones, Dominations, Powers,’ had done their work, and were
venerable in it, so also in their degrees and sorts had Congreve and
Watteau, Sir Thomas Browne and Sir Anthony Van Dyck, Wycherley and
Jordaens; so had even Salvator and John Buncle. In dealing with
painters, and with purely painters’ pictures, Hazlitt generally strikes
a right note.[10] But the man of letters in him is inevitably first; and
’tis not insignificant that some of the ‘crack passages’ in his writings
about pictures are rhapsodies about places—Burleigh or Oxford—or pieces
of pure literature like that very human and ingenious essay ‘On the
Pleasures of Painting,’ which is one of the best good things in _Table
Talk_.


                                  III

So Hazlitt the painter was gathered to his fathers, and in his stead a
Hazlitt reigned about whom the world knows little worth the telling: a
Hazlitt who abridged philosophers, and made grammars, and compiled
anthologies; a married and domesticated Hazlitt; a Hazlitt with a son
and heir, and a wife who seems to have cared as little for his works and
him as, in the long run, he assuredly cared for her company and her. The
lady’s name was Stoddart; she was a brisk, inconsequent, unsexual sort
of person—a friend of Mary Lamb; and, like the only Mrs. Pecksniff, ‘she
had a small property.’ It was situate at Winterslow, certain miles from
Salisbury, and Hazlitt, who loved the neighbourhood, and clung to it
till the end, has so far illustrated the name that, if there could ever
be a Hazlitt Cult, the place would instantly become a shrine. It was a
cottage, within easy walking distance of Wilton and Stonehenge; and in
1812 the Hazlitts, who were made one in 1808, departed it—it and the
well-beloved woods of Norman Court—for 19 York Street, Westminster.[11]
Hence it was that he issued to deliver his first course of lectures;[12]
and here it was that he entertained those friends he had, made himself a
reputation by writing in papers and magazines, drank hard, and cured
himself of drinking, and long ere the end came found his wife
insufferable. In the beginning he worked in the Reporters’ Gallery,
where he made notes (in long hand) for _The Morning Chronicle_, and
learned to take more liquor than was good for him.[13] In this same
journal he printed some of his best political work, and broke ground as
a critic of acting; and he left it only because he could not help
quarrelling with its proprietors.

Another stand-by of his was _The Champion_, to his work in which he owed
a not unprofitable connexion with _The Edinburgh_; yet another, _The
Examiner_, to which, with much dramatic criticism, he contributed, at
Leigh Hunt’s suggestion, the set of essays reprinted as _The Round
Table_, and in which he may therefore be said to have discovered his
avocation, and given the measure of his best quality. Then, in 1817, he
published his _Characters of Shakespeare_, which he dedicated to Charles
Lamb; in 1818 he reprinted a series of lectures (at the Surrey
Institute) on the English poets;[14] in 1819–20 he delivered from the
same platform two courses more—on the Comic Writers and the Age of
Elizabeth. He wrote for _The Liberal_, _The Yellow Dwarf_, _The London
Magazine_—(to which he may very well have introduced the unknown
Elia)—_Colburn’s New Monthly_; he returned to the _Chronicle_ in 1824;
in 1825 he published _The Spirit of the Age_, in 1826 _The Plain
Speaker_, the _Boswell Redivivus_ in 1827; and in this last year he set
to work, at Winterslow, on a life of Napoleon. That was the beginning of
the end. He had no turn for history, nor none for research; his methods
were personal, his results singular and brief; he was as it were an
accidental writer, whose true material was in himself. His health broke,
and worsened; his publishers went bankrupt; he lost the best part of the
£500 which he had hoped to earn by his work; and though, consulting none
but anti-English authorities, he lived to complete a book containing
much strong thinking and not a few striking passages, it was a thing
foredoomed to failure: a matter in which the nation, still hating its
tremendous enemy, and still rejoicing in the man and the battle which
had brought him to the ground, would not, and could not take an
interest. Two volumes were published in 1828 (Sir Walter’s _Napoleon_
appeared in 1827), and two more in 1830; but the work of writing them
killed the writer.[15] His digestion, always feeble, was ruined; and in
the September of 1830 he died. He was largely, I should say, a sacrifice
to tea, which he drank, in vast quantities, of extraordinary strength.
However this be, his ending was (as he’d have loved to put it) ‘as a
Chrissom child’s.’[16]


                                   IV

Thus much, thus all-too little, of his course in print. For his life,
despite his many ‘bursts of confidence,’ the admissions of his grandson,
and the discoveries of such friends as Patmore, the half of it, I think,
has to be told to us. This was not his fault, for he was in no sense
secretive: he would no more lie about himself than he would lie about
Southey or Gifford. His trick of drinking was, while it lasted, public;
he proclaimed with all his lungs his frank and full approval of the
fundamentals of the Revolution and his preference of Bonaparte before
all the Kings in Europe; he despised Shelley the politician, and
rejected Shelley the poet, and he cherished and made the most he could
of his resentment against Coleridge and Wordsworth, though his disdain
for concealment perilled his friendship with Lamb, and well nigh cost
him the far more facile regard of Leigh Hunt; while, as for Byron, he so
bitterly resented the ‘noble Lord’s’ pre-eminency that he made no
difference, strongly as he contemned the Laureate, between the
Laureate’s _Vision of Judgment_, a piece of English verse immortal by
the sheer force of its absurdity, and that other _Vision of Judgment_,
which is one of the great things in English poetry. ’Twas much the same
in life. Poor Mrs. Hazlitt, though she was well-read, of no account as
an housekeeper, ‘fond of incongruous finery,’ and capable of
child-bearing withal, was, one may take for granted, not distinguished
as a woman. Now, her husband, thinker as he approved himself, was very
much of a male. Who runs may read of his early loves—Miss Railton and
the rest; ’tis history—at any rate ’tis history according to
Wordsworth[17]—that once, in Lakeland, he so dealt with the local beauty
that he came very near to tasting of the local pond; when Patmore walked
home with him to Westminster, after his first lecture in the Surrey
Institute, the wayside nymphs flocked to his encounter, and—(so Patmore
says)—he knew them all;[18] he has himself recorded the confession that
in the matter of mob-caps and black stockings and red elbows—in fact, on
the score of your maid-servant—he could flourish a list as long, or
thereabouts, as Leporello’s. I know not whether he lied or spoke the
truth;[19] but I can scarce believe that he lied. I should rather opine
that on this point, as on others, Hazlitt, a gross and extravagant
admirer (be it remembered) of J.-J. Rousseau, was, and is, entirely
credible. We may take it that his veracity is beyond reproach. But ’tis
another matter with his taste; and for that I can say no more than that
I have listened to so many confidences:

            From some we loved, the loveliest and the best
            That from his Vintage rolling Time has pressed:

that I hold it for merely unessential.

But the man who habitually hugs his housemaid is, whether he boast of it
or not, no more superior to consequences than another: especially if he
have, as Hazlitt had, an ardent imagination and a teeming waste of
sentiment. And so Hazlitt found. About 1819 he ceased from consorting
with his wife; and in 1820 he lodged with a tailor, one Walker, in
Southampton Buildings, Chancery Lane. Walker, a most respectable man,
had daughters, and one of these, a girl well broken-in, it would seem,
to the ways of ‘gentlemen’—a girl with a dull eye, a ‘sinuous gait,’ and
a habit of sitting on the knees of ‘gentlemen’; a girl, in fine, who is
only to be described by an old and sane and homely but unquotable
designation—this poor half-harlot took on our Don Juan of the area, and
brought him to utter grief. He looked at passion, as embodied in Sarah
Walker, until it grew to be the world to him; he went about like a man
drunken and dazed, telling the story of his slighted love to anybody
that would listen to it;[20] now he raved and was rampant, now was he
soul-stricken and heart-broken; he swore he’d marry Walker whether she
would or not, and to this end he persuaded his wife to follow him to
Edinburgh, and there divorce him—_pour cause_, as the lady and her legal
adviser had every reason to believe;[21] and having achieved a divorce,
which was no divorce in law, and been finally refused by the young woman
in Southampton Buildings, he set to work assiduously to coin his madness
into drachmas, and wrote, always with Jean-Jacques Rousseau in his eye,
that _Liber Amoris_ which the unknowing reader will find in our Second
Volume. It is a book by no means bad—if you can at all away with it.
Indeed, it is unique in English, and the hundred guineas Hazlitt got for
it were uncommonly well earned. But to away with it at all—that is the
difficulty; and, as it varies with the temperaments of them that read
the book, I shall discourse no more of it, but content myself with
noting that, in writing the _Liber Amoris_, Hazlitt wrote off Sarah
Walker.[22] He had been in love with a housemaid, but he had been very
much more in love with his love; and, having wearied all he knew with
descriptions of his feelings, he wrote those feelings down, cleared his
system, and became himself again. ’Twas Goethe’s way, I believe—his and
many another’s; the world will scarce get disaccustomed to it while
there are women and writing men. What distinguishes Hazlitt from a whole
wilderness of self-chroniclers is the fulness of his revelation. It is
extraordinary; but, even so, Rousseau had shown him the way. And perhaps
the simple truth about the _Liber_ is that it is the best Rousseau—the
best and the nearest to the _Confessions_—done since Rousseau died.

Sarah Hazlitt married no more; but her husband did. In 1824 he took to
wife a certain Mrs. Bridgewater. She was Scots by birth, had lived much
abroad, had married and buried a Colonel Bridgewater, was of excellent
repute, and had about £300 a year; and with her new husband and his son
by Sarah Stoddart—(who had an idea that his mother had been wronged, and
seems to have been a most uncomfortable travelling companion)—she toured
it awhile in France and Italy. On the return journey the Hazlitts left
her in Paris; and when the elder, writing from London, asked her when
she purposed to come home to him, she replied that she did not purpose
to come home to him: that, in fact, she had done with him, and he would
see her no more. So far as I know, he never did; so that, as his
grandson says, this second marriage was but ‘an episode.’ Apparently it
was the last in his life; for neither Mrs. Hazlitt attended him in his
mortal illness, nor was there any woman at his bed’s head when he
passed.


                                   V

It is told of him that he was dark-eyed and dark-haired, slim in figure,
rather slovenly in his habit; that he valued himself on his effect in
evening dress; that his manners were rather ceremonious than easy; that
he had a wonderfully eloquent face, with a mouth as expressive as
Kean’s, and a frown like the Giaour’s own[23]—that Giaour whom he did
not love. He worshipped women, but was awkward and afraid with them; he
played a good game of fives, and would walk his forty to fifty miles a
day; he would lie a-bed till two in the afternoon, then rise, dally with
his breakfast until eight without ever moving from his tea-pot and his
chair, and go to a theatre, a bite at the Southampton, and talk till two
in the morning.[24] That he excelled in talk is beyond all doubt.
Witness after witness is here to his wit, his insight, his grip on
essentials, his beautiful trick of paradox, his brilliancy in attack,
his desperate defence, his varying, far-glancing, inextinguishable
capacity for expression. And he was himself—Hazlitt: a man who borrowed
nobody’s methods, set no limits to the field of discussion, nor made
other men wonder if this were no talk but a lecture. He bore no likeness
to that ‘great but useless genius,’ Coleridge: who, beginning well as
few begin, lived ever after ‘on the sound of his own voice’; none to
Wordsworth, whose most inspiring theme was his own poetry; none to
Sheridan, who ‘never oped his mouth but out there flew’ a jest; none to
Lamb, who——But no; I cannot imagine Lamb in talk. Hazlitt himself has
plucked out only a tag or two of Lamb’s mystery; and I own that, even in
the presence of the notes in which he sets down Lamb as Lamb was to his
intimates, I am divided in appreciation between the pair. Lamb for the
unexpected, the incongruous, the profound, the jest that bred
seriousness, the pun that was that and a light upon dark places, a touch
of the dread, the all-disclosing Selene, besides; Hazlitt for none of
these but for himself; and what that was I have tried to show. Well;
Lamb, Coleridge, Sheridan, Hazlitt, Hunt, Wordsworth—all are dead, tall
men of their tongues as they were. And dead is Burke, and Fox is dead,
and Byron, most quizzical of lords! And of them all there is nothing
left but their published work; and of those that have told us most about
some of them, ‘in their habit as they lived,’ the best and the
strictest-seeing, the most eloquent and the most persuasive, is
assuredly Hazlitt. And, being something of an expert in talk,[25] I
think that, if I could break the grave and call the great ghosts back to
earth for a spell of their mortal fury, I would begin and end with Lamb
and Hazlitt: Lamb as he always was;[26] Hazlitt in one of his high and
mighty moods, sweeping life, and letters, and the art of painting, and
the nature of man, and the curious case of woman (especially the curious
case of woman!) into a rapture of give-and-take, a night-long series of
achievements in consummate speech.


                                   VI

Many men, as Coleridge, have written well, and yet talked better than
they wrote. I have named Coleridge, though his talk, prodigious as it
was, in the long run ended in ‘Om-m-mject’ and ‘Sum-m-mject,’ and
though, some enchanting and undying verses apart, his writing, save when
it is merely critical, is nowadays of small account. But, in truth, I
have in my mind, rather, two friends, both dead, of whom one, an artist
in letters, lived to conquer the English-speaking world, while the
second, who should, I think, have been the greater writer, addicted
himself to another art, took to letters late in life, and, having the
largest and the most liberal utterance I have known, was constrained by
the very process of composition so to produce himself that scarce a
touch of his delightful, apprehensive, all-expressing spirit appeared
upon his page. I take these two cases because both are excessive. In the
one you had both speech and writing; in the other you found a rarer
brain, a more fanciful and daring humour, a richer gusto, perhaps a
wider knowledge, in any event a wider charity. And at one point the two
met, and that point was talk. Therein each was pre-eminent, each
irresistible, each a master after his kind, each endowed with a full
measure of those gifts that qualify the talker’s temperament: as voice
and eye and laugh, look and gesture, humour and fantasy, audacity and
agility of mind, a lively and most impudent invention, a copious
vocabulary, a right gift of foolery, a just, inevitable sense of
conversational right and wrong. Well; one wrote like an angel, the other
like poor Poll; and both so far excelled in talk that I can take it on
me to say that they who know them only in print scarce know them at all.
’Twas thus, I imagine, with Hazlitt. He wrote the best he could; but I
see many reasons to believe that he was very much more brilliant and
convincing at the Southampton than he is in the most convincing and the
most brilliant of his Essays. He was a full man; he had all the talker’s
gifts; he exulted in all kinds of oral opportunities; what more is there
to say? Sure ’tis the case of all that are born to talk as well as
write. They live their best in talk, and what they write is but a sop
for posterity: a last dying speech and confession (as it were) to show
that not for nothing were they held rare fellows in their day.

This is not to say that Hazlitt was not an admirable man of letters. His
theories were many, for he was a reality among men, and so had many
interests, and there was none on which he did not write forcibly,
luminously, arrestingly. He had the true sense of his material, and used
the English language as a painter his pigments, as a musician the
varying and abounding tonalities that constitute a symphonic scheme. His
were a beautiful and choice vocabulary, an excellent ear for cadence, a
notable gift of expression. In fact, when Stevenson was pleased to
declare that ‘we are mighty fine fellows, but we cannot write like
William Hazlitt,’ he said no more than the truth. Whether or not we are
mighty fine fellows is a Great Perhaps; but that none of us, from
Stevenson down, can as writers come near to Hazlitt—this, to me, is
merely indubitable. To note that he now and then writes blank verse is
to note that he sometimes writes impassioned prose;[27] he misquoted
habitually; he was a good hater, and could be monstrous unfair; he was
given to thinking twice, and his second thoughts were not always better
than his first; he repeated himself as seemed good to him. But in the
criticism of politics, the criticism of letters, the criticism of
acting, the criticism and expression of life,[28] there is none like
him. His politics are not mine; I think he is ridiculously mistaken when
he contrasts the Wordsworth of the best things in _The Excursion_ with
the ‘classic Akenside’; his _Byron_ is the merest petulance; his _Burke_
(when he is in a bad temper with Burke), his _Fox_, his _Pitt_, his
_Bonaparte_—these are impossible. Also, I never talk art or life with
him but I disagree. But I go on reading him, all the same; and I find
that technically and spiritually I am always the better for the bout.
Where outside Boswell is there better talk than in Hazlitt’s _Boswell
Redivivus_—his so-called _Conversations with Northcote_? And his _Age of
Elizabeth_, and his _Comic Writers_, and his _Spirit of the Age_—where
else to look for such a feeling for differences, such a sense of
literature, such an instant, such a masterful, whole-hearted interest in
the marking and distinguishing qualities of writers? And _The Plain
Speaker_—is it not at least as good reading as (say) _Virginibus
Puerisque_ and the discoursings of the late imperishable Mr. Pater! His
_Political Essays_ is readable after—how many years? His notes on Kean
and the Siddons are as novel and convincing as when they were penned. In
truth, he is ever a solace and a refreshment. As a critic of letters he
lacks the intense, immortalising vision, even as he lacks, in places,
the illuminating and inevitable style of Lamb. But if he be less
savoury, he is also more solid, and he gives you phrases, conclusions,
splendours of insight and expression, high-piled and golden essays in
appreciation: as the _Wordsworth_ and the _Coleridge_ of the _Political
Essays_, the character of Hamlet, the note on Shakespeare’s style, the
_Horne Tooke_, the _Cervantes_, the _Rousseau_, the _Sir Thomas Browne_,
the _Cobbet_: that must ever be rated high among the possessions of the
English mind.

As a writer, therefore, it is with Lamb that I would bracket him: they
are dissimilars, but they go gallantly and naturally together—_par
nobile fratrum_.[29] Give us these two, with some ripe Cobbett, a volume
of Southey, some Wordsworth, certain pages of Shelley, a great deal of
the Byron who wrote letters, and we get the right prose of the time. The
best of it all, perhaps, is the best of Lamb. But Hazlitt’s, for
different qualities, is so imminent and shining a second that I hesitate
as to the pre-eminency. Probably the race is Lamb’s. But Hazlitt is ever
Hazlitt; and at his highest moments Hazlitt is hard to beat, and has not
these many years been beaten.

                                                                W. E. H.

-----

Footnote 1:

  Hazlitt has glanced at him in his notes on dissenters and dissent in
  the _Political Essays_, and has given a further taste of him in that
  very notable and gracious piece, ‘My First Acquaintance with Poets.’

Footnote 2:

  In 1805 he produced his essay on the Principles of Human Action. Being
  no metaphysician, I have never read this work; but Mr. Leslie Stephen,
  who is a very competent person in these matters, I am told, assures me
  (_D. N. B._) that it is ‘scrupulously dry,’ though ‘showing great
  acuteness.’ This, I take leave to say—this is Hazlitt all over. None
  has written of the workaday elements in life and time with a rarer
  taste, a finer relish, a stronger confidence in himself and them. Yet,
  in dealing with absolutes in life and time, he is ‘scrupulously dry.’
  This, I take it, is to be a man of letters.

Footnote 3:

  Or rather bedgown: unction-soiled and laudanum-stained.

Footnote 4:

  John Hazlitt had been a pupil of Reynolds, and his miniatures were
  welcome at the Academy.

Footnote 5:

  Dans l’art il faut donner sa peau.

Footnote 6:

  He had a painter in him, whether imperfectly developed or not; for he
  would condescend upon none but Guido, Raphael, Titian.

Footnote 7:

  One was a likeness of his father, of which he has written in eloquent
  and engaging terms; another, a _Wordsworth_, which he destroyed; a
  third, the picture of Elia, ‘as a Venetian senator,’ now in the
  National Portrait Gallery; yet another, the presentment of an Old
  Woman, which is likened to a Rembrandt. Having seen none of these
  things, all I can say about them is that Hazlitt seems to have been
  passionately interested in colour; that he loved a picture because it
  was a piece of painting; and, if he knew not always bad (or rather
  third and fourth rate) work when he saw it, was as contemptuous of it,
  when he realised its status, as Fuseli himself.

Footnote 8:

  There is an immense, even an insuperable difference between the two
  sorts of sensualists. To take an immediate instance: Lamb loved
  Hogarth, and found emotions in him, because he (Hogarth) was a
  novelist in paint; while Titian’s _Bacchus and Ariadne_ touched his
  sense of letters, and, as Mr. Ainger has noted, suggested to him so
  much literature, or, at all events, so many literary possibilities,
  that Titian could not but be an arch-painter. Hazlitt felt his painter
  first, and thought not of the man-of-letters in his painter till his
  interest in his painter’s painting was—I won’t say extinguished
  but—allayed.

Footnote 9:

  ‘The point in debate,’ he says, ‘the worth or the bad quality of the
  painting ... I am as well able to decide upon as any who ever
  brandished a pallette.’ I doubt not that he spoke the truth; yet the
  residuum of his criticisms of pictures, their after-taste, is mostly
  literary. And, as he was finally a man of letters, what else could one
  expect?

Footnote 10:

  Leigh Hunt said that he was the best art critic that ever lived: that
  to read him was like seeing a picture through stained glass, and so
  forth. But Leigh Hunt knew not much more about pictures than Coleridge
  knew about the books he talked of, but had not read.

Footnote 11:

  The house had been the abode of Milton; for certain months it had
  harboured the eminent James Mill; it belonged to the celebrated Jeremy
  Bentham: so that in the matter of associations Hazlitt, a
  thorough-paced dissenter, was as well off as he could hope to be.

Footnote 12:

  Ten in number: on ‘The Rise and Progress of Modern Philosophy,’ as
  illustrated in the works of Hobbes, Locke and his followers, Hartley,
  Helvétius, and others. The lectures, Mr. Stephen says, were in part a
  reproduction of the _Principles of Human Action_.

Footnote 13:

  Haydon says that Waterloo made him drunk for weeks. Then he pulled
  himself together, and for the rest of his life drank nothing but
  strong tea. He had, however, no sort of sympathy with those who held
  the ‘social glass’ to be Man’s safest introduction to the Pit. He only
  said that liquor did not agree with him, and looked on cheerfully
  while his friends—Lamb was as close as any—drank as they pleased.

Footnote 14:

  Both the _Characters_ and the _English Poets_ were reviewed by Gifford
  in the _Quarterly_. The style of these ‘reviews’ is abject; the
  inspiration venal; the matter the very dirt of the mind. Gifford hated
  Hazlitt for his politics, and set out to wither Hazlitt’s repute as a
  man of letters. For the tremendous reprisal with which he was visited,
  the reader is referred to the _Letter to William Gifford, Esq._, in
  the first volume of the present Edition. If he find it over-savage:
  probably, being of to-day, he will: let him turn to his _Quarterly_,
  and consider, if he have the stomach, Gifford and the matter of
  offence.

Footnote 15:

  He lived to rejoice in the Revolution of July; but of the great
  movement in the arts—of _Henri Trois et sa Cour_ and _Hernani_, of
  Delacroix and Barye, of Géricault and Bonington and de Vigny, and the
  rest of its heroes—he seems to have known nothing. That was his way.
  The new did not exist for him. A dissenter by birth and conviction, he
  yet cared only for the past, and the elder ‘glories of our blood and
  state’ were to him, not shadows but, the sole substantial things he
  could keep room for in the kingdom of his mind.

Footnote 16:

  ’Tis a pleasure to remember that Lamb was with him to the end—was in
  his death-chamber in the very article of mortality. We have all read
  Carlyle on Lamb. The everlasting pity is that we shall never read
  Hazlitt on Carlyle.

Footnote 17:

  Him Shelley calls ‘a solemn and unsexual man.’

Footnote 18:

  Much as years afterwards, according to a certain Nicolardot, the
  expertest of their kind were ‘on the list’ of old Ste.-Beuve.

Footnote 19:

  His grandson describes him as ‘physically incapable’ of any but a
  transient fidelity to anybody.

Footnote 20:

  He confessed that one day he told it half a dozen times or so to
  persons he had never seen before: once, twice over to the same
  listener.

Footnote 21:

  It cost Hazlitt a crown, perhaps less; and he arranged—apparently with
  Mrs. Hazlitt—to be taken in the act! After this the knowledge that Mr.
  and Mrs. Hazlitt took tea together, _pendente lite_, and that then and
  after his second espousals Hazlitt supplied this very reasonable woman
  with money, astonishes no more, but comes as a kind of anticlimax.

Footnote 22:

  That damsel presently married in her station. She seems to have been a
  decent woman according to her lights, and to have lived up honestly to
  her ideals, such as they were.

Footnote 23:

             There was a laughing devil in his sneer
             That raised emotions both of rage and fear;
             And where his frown of hatred darkly fell,
             Hope, withering, fled—and Mercy sighed farewell.

Footnote 24:

  These details are Patmore’s, and, even if they be true, are not the
  whole truth. Hazlitt loved solitude and the country, had to write for
  a living, wrote with difficulty, and left no inconsiderable body of
  work.

Footnote 25:

  What I mean is, that I have heard the best, as I believe, the last of
  the old century and the first of the new have shown.

Footnote 26:

  ‘He always made the best pun and the best remark in the course of the
  evening. His serious conversation, like his serious writing, is his
  best. No one ever stammered out such fine, piquant, deep, eloquent
  things in half a dozen half-sentences as he does. His jests scald like
  tears: and he probes a question with a play upon words. What a keen,
  laughing, hare-brained vein of home-felt truth! What choice venom!’

Footnote 27:

             It filled the valley like a mist,
             And still poured out its endless chant,
             And still it swells upon the ear,
             And wraps me in a golden trance,
             Drowning the noisy tumult of the world.

                    .       .       .       .       .       .

             Like sweetest warblings from a sacred grove ...
             Contending with the wild winds as they roar ...
             And the proud places of the insolent
             And the oppressor fell ...
             Such and so little is the mind of Man!

Footnote 28:

  His summary of the fight between Hickman and Bill Neate is alone in
  literature, as also in the annals of the Ring. Jon Bee was an
  intelligent creature of his kind, and knew a very great deal more
  about pugilism than Hazlitt knew; but to contrast the two is to learn
  much. Badcock (which is Jon Bee) had seen (and worshipped) Jem
  Belcher, and had reported fights with an extreme contempt for Pierce
  Egan, the illiterate ass who gave us _Boxiana_. Hazlitt, however,
  looked on at the proceedings of Neate and the Gaslight Man exactly as
  he had looked on at divers creations of Edmund Kean. He saw the
  essentials in both expressions of human activity, and his treatment of
  both is fundamentally the same. In both he ignores the trivial: here
  the acting (in its lowest sense), there the hits that did not count.
  And thus, as he gives you only the vital touches, you know how and why
  Neate beat Hickman, and can tell the exact moment at which Hickman
  began to be a beaten man. ’Tis the same with his panegyric on
  Cavanagh, the fives-player. For a blend of gusto with understanding I
  know but one thing to equal with this: the note on Dr. Grace, which
  appeared in _The National Observer_; and the night that that was
  written, I sent the writer back to Hazlitt’s _Cavanagh_, and said to
  him ——! On the whole the _Dr. Grace_ is the better of the two. But it
  has scarce the incorruptible fatness of the _Cavanagh_. Gusto, though,
  is Hazlitt’s special attribute: he glories in what he likes, what he
  reads, what he feels, what he writes. He triumphed in his Kean, his
  Shakespeare, his Bill Neate, his Rousseau, his coffee-and-cream and
  _Love for Love_ in the inn-parlour at Alton. He relished things; and
  expressed them with a relish. That is his ‘note.’ Some others have
  relished only the consummate expression of nothing.

Footnote 29:

  Listen, else, to Lamb himself: ‘Protesting against much that he has
  written, and some things which he chooses to do; judging him by his
  conversation which I enjoyed so long, and relished so deeply; or by
  his books, in those places where no clouding passion intervenes, I
  should belie my own conscience if I said less than that I think W. H.
  to be, in his natural and healthy state, one of the wisest and finest
  spirits breathing. So far from being ashamed of that intimacy which
  was betwixt us, it is my boast that I was able for so many years to
  have preserved it entire; and I think I shall go to my grave without
  finding or expecting to find such another companion.’ Thus does one
  Royalty celebrate the kingship and enrich the immortality of another.




                            EDITORS’ PREFACE


Two previous editions of Hazlitt’s works have been published: the
Templeman edition, edited by the author’s son, and the seven volume
edition in Bohn’s Library, edited by the author’s grandson, Mr. W. Carew
Hazlitt. Valuable as these editions are from the exceptional advantages
enjoyed by the respective editors, neither of them professes to be, or
is, complete, and the aim of the present edition is to give for the
first time an accurate text of the complete collected writings of
Hazlitt with the exception of his _Life of Napoleon_.

In the case of works published in book form by Hazlitt himself the
latest edition published in his lifetime is here reprinted. Some obvious
errors of the press have been corrected, but no attempt has been made to
modernise or improve Hazlitt’s orthography or punctuation. He himself
expressed contempt for ‘the collating of points and commas,’ and was
probably a careless proof reader. He did not plume himself, as Boswell
did, upon a deliberately adopted orthography, and his punctuation and
use of italics were perhaps rather his printers’ fancy than his own.
However that may be, the Editors feel that there is no justification for
any tampering with his text. Essays not republished by Hazlitt himself
are printed from the periodical or other publication in which they first
appeared.

It has been found impossible to avoid a good deal of repetition. All
readers of Hazlitt know that he repeated not only phrases and sentences,
but paragraphs and pages, as, _e.g._, in the case of the essay on ‘The
Character of Pitt’ (see note to p. 125). A few of such cases might have
been dealt with by means of cross references, but they are so numerous
that the cross references would have become tiresome if only one of the
identical or nearly identical passages had been printed.

The notes chiefly contain bibliographical matter, concise biographical
details of some of the persons mentioned by Hazlitt, and references to
quotations. They also include several passages which Hazlitt omitted
from his essays when he came to republish them in book form. Some of
these are in themselves worthy of preservation; some help to explain the
ferocity of certain contemporary allusions; and it is at any rate
interesting to compare what he rejected with what he retained in moments
of reflection.

One word is necessary here as to the course which has been adopted with
Hazlitt’s very numerous and very inaccurate quotations. In many cases
his quotations are simply and unintentionally inaccurate, but very often
he misquotes (if so it can be called) on purpose. That is to say, in his
masterful way he presses quotations into his service, and if they are
not exactly serviceable as they stand, he makes them so by changing a
word here and there, or by blending two or more quotations together. He
sometimes quotes (or misquotes) without using quotation marks, and the
Editors would fain believe that he sometimes uses quotation marks to
round off some unusually happy phrase of his own. The variations between
Hazlitt and his original are given in the notes where it seemed
desirable that they should be given, but in no case have his quotations
been corrected or altered in the _text_.

It has been a pleasure to the Editors to have the sympathy and
co-operation of Mr. W. Carew Hazlitt, and they desire to thank him for
his valuable assistance. At the same time they accept entire
responsibility for the errors and failings which may be found in their
work.

                                                                A. R. W.
                                                                A. G.




                            THE ROUND TABLE


                          BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

  _The Round Table_ was published in two 12mo volumes in 1817. The
  title-page runs as follows: ‘The Round Table: A Collection of Essays
  on Literature, Men, and Manners, By William Hazlitt. Edinburgh:
  Printed for Archibald Constable and Co. And Longman, Hurst, Rees,
  Orme, and Brown, London, 1817.’ Twelve of the fifty-two numbers were
  by Leigh Hunt, as the Advertisement explains. The essays consisted
  for the most part, but not entirely, of papers contributed to _The
  Examiner_ under the title of ‘The Round Table’ between January 1,
  1815, and January 5, 1817. Hazlitt, however, included several essays
  taken from other columns of _The Examiner_ and from _The Morning
  Chronicle_ and other sources, and did not include the whole of his
  contributions to the Round Table series. A ‘third’ edition, edited
  by the author’s son, was published in one 12mo volume in 1841. In
  this edition many essays were omitted which had appeared, or were
  intended to appear, in the series of Hazlitt’s works then being
  published by Templeman; three essays contributed by Hazlitt to _The
  Liberal_ in 1822 were added; and Leigh Hunt’s essays were retained.
  Hazlitt’s essays as published in the two volumes of 1817 were
  restored, and Leigh Hunt’s essays were for the first time omitted in
  a later edition (8vo, 1871) edited by the author’s grandson, Mr. W.
  C. Hazlitt. The present edition is an exact reproduction of
  Hazlitt’s essays from the edition of 1817, except that a few obvious
  printer’s errors have been corrected. Of the contributions made by
  Hazlitt to the Round Table series in _The Examiner_ and not included
  in the two volumes of 1817 some were used by him in other
  publications, _Characters of Shakespear’s Plays_ (1817) and
  _Political Essays_ (1819), some were published in the posthumous
  _Winterslow_ (1850), and some have not been hitherto republished.
  The source of each of the following essays is indicated in the
  Notes. Gifford’s review of _The Round Table_ in _The Quarterly
  Review_ for April 1817 is dealt with by the author in _A Letter to
  William Gifford, Esq._, which is included in this volume.


                  ADVERTISEMENT TO THE EDITION OF 1817

The following work falls somewhat short of its title and original
intention. It was proposed by my friend, Mr. Hunt, to publish a series
of papers in the Examiner, in the manner of the early periodical
Essayists, the Spectator and Tatler. These papers were to be contributed
by various persons on a variety of subjects; and Mr. Hunt, as the
Editor, was to take the characteristic or dramatic part of the work upon
himself. I undertook to furnish occasional Essays and Criticisms; one or
two other friends promised their assistance; but the essence of the work
was to be miscellaneous. The next thing was to fix upon a title for it.
After much doubtful consultation, that of THE ROUND TABLE was agreed
upon as most descriptive of its nature and design. But our plan had been
no sooner arranged and entered upon, than Buonaparte landed at Frejus,
_et voila la Table Ronde dissoute_. Our little congress was broken up as
well as the great one; Politics called off the attention of the Editor
from the _Belles Lettres_; and the task of continuing the work fell
chiefly upon the person who was least able to give life and spirit to
the original design. A want of variety in the subjects and mode of
treating them, is, perhaps, the least disadvantage resulting from this
circumstance. All the papers, in the two volumes here offered to the
public, were written by myself and Mr. Hunt, except a letter
communicated by a friend in the seventeenth number. Out of the fifty-two
numbers, twelve are Mr. Hunt’s, with the signatures L. H. or H. T. For
all the rest I am answerable.

                                                             W. HAZLITT.

 _January 5, 1817._


                                CONTENTS

                                                                   PAGE

 On the Love of Life                                                   1

 On Classical Education                                                4

 On the Tatler                                                         7

 On Modern Comedy                                                     10

 On Mr. Kean’s Iago                                                   14

 On the Love of the Country                                           17

 On Posthumous Fame.—Whether Shakspeare was influenced by a Love
   of it?                                                             21

 On Hogarth’s Marriage a-la-mode                                      25

 The Subject continued                                                28

 On Milton’s Lycidas                                                  31

 On Milton’s Versification                                            36

 On Manner                                                            41

 On the Tendency of Sects                                             47

 On John Buncle                                                       51

 On the Causes of Methodism                                           57

 On the Midsummer Night’s Dream                                       61

 On the Beggar’s Opera                                                65

 On Patriotism—A Fragment                                             67

 On Beauty                                                            68

 On Imitation                                                         72

 On _Gusto_                                                           77

 On Pedantry                                                          80

 The same Subject continued                                           84

 On the Character of Rousseau                                         88

 On Different Sorts of Fame                                           93

 Character of John Bull                                               97

 On Good-Nature                                                      100

 On the Character of Milton’s Eve                                    105

 Observations on Mr. Wordsworth’s Poem The Excursion                 111

 The same Subject continued                                          120

 Character of the late Mr. Pitt                                      125

 On Religious Hypocrisy                                              128

 On the Literary Character                                           131

 On Common-place Critics                                             136

 On the Catalogue Raisonné of the British Institution                140

 The same Subject continued                                          146

 On Poetical Versatility                                             151

 On Actors and Acting                                                153

 On the Same                                                         156

 Why the Arts are not Progressive: A Fragment                        160




                            THE ROUND TABLE


 NO. 1.]                   ON THE LOVE OF LIFE           [JAN. 15, 1815.

It is our intention, in the course of these papers, occasionally to
expose certain vulgar errors, which have crept into our reasonings on
men and manners. Perhaps one of the most interesting of these, is that
which relates to the source of our general attachment to life. We are
not going to enter into the question, whether life is, on the whole, to
be regarded as a blessing, though we are by no means inclined to adopt
the opinion of that sage, who thought ‘that the best thing that could
have happened to a man was never to have been born, and the next best to
have died the moment after he came into existence.’ The common argument,
however, which is made use of to prove the value of life, from the
strong desire which almost every one feels for its continuance, appears
to be altogether inconclusive. The wise and the foolish, the weak and
the strong, the lame and the blind, the prisoner and the free, the
prosperous and the wretched, the beggar and the king, the rich and the
poor, the young and the old, from the little child who tries to leap
over his own shadow, to the old man who stumbles blindfold on his grave,
all feel this desire in common. Our notions with respect to the
importance of life, and our attachment to it, depend on a principle,
which has very little to do with its happiness or its misery.

The love of life is, in general, the effect not of our enjoyments, but
of our passions. We are not attached to it so much for its own sake, or
as it is connected with happiness, as because it is necessary to action.
Without life there can be no action—no objects of pursuit—no restless
desires—no tormenting passions. Hence it is that we fondly cling to
it—that we dread its termination as the close, not of enjoyment, but of
hope. The proof that our attachment to life is not absolutely owing to
the immediate satisfaction we find in it, is, that those persons are
commonly found most loth to part with it who have the least enjoyment of
it, and who have the greatest difficulties to struggle with, as losing
gamesters are the most desperate. And farther, there are not many
persons who, with all their pretended love of life, would not, if it had
been in their power, have melted down the longest life to a few hours.
‘The school-boy,’ says Addison, ‘counts the time till the return of the
holidays; the minor longs to be of age; the lover is impatient till he
is married.’—‘Hope and fantastic expectations spend much of our lives;
and while with passion we look for a coronation, or the death of an
enemy, or a day of joy, passing from fancy to possession without any
intermediate notices, we throw away a precious year’ (Jeremy Taylor). We
would willingly, and without remorse, sacrifice not only the present
moment, but all the interval (no matter how long) that separates us from
any favourite object. We chiefly look upon life, then, as the means to
an end. Its common enjoyments and its daily evils are alike disregarded
for any idle purpose we have in view. It should seem as if there were a
few green sunny spots in the desert of life, to which we are always
hastening forward: we eye them wistfully in the distance, and care not
what perils or suffering we endure, so that we arrive at them at last.
However weary we may be of the same stale round—however sick of the
past—however hopeless of the future—the mind still revolts at the
thought of death, because the fancied possibility of good, which always
remains with life, gathers strength as it is about to be torn from us
for ever, and the dullest scene looks bright compared with the darkness
of the grave. Our reluctance to part with existence evidently does not
depend on the calm and even current of our lives, but on the force and
impulse of the passions. Hence that indifference to death which has been
sometimes remarked in people who lead a solitary and peaceful life in
remote and barren districts. The pulse of life in them does not beat
strong enough to occasion any violent revulsion of the frame when it
ceases. He who treads the green mountain turf, or he who sleeps beneath
it, enjoys an almost equal quiet. The death of those persons has always
been accounted happy, who had attained their utmost wishes, who had
nothing left to regret or to desire. Our repugnance to death increases
in proportion to our consciousness of having lived in vain—to the
violence of our efforts, and the keenness of our disappointments—and to
our earnest desire to find in the future, if possible, a rich amends for
the past. We may be said to nurse our existence with the greatest
tenderness, according to the pain it has cost us; and feel at every step
of our varying progress the truth of that line of the poet—

             ‘An ounce of sweet is worth a pound of sour.’

The love of life is in fact the sum of all our passions and of all our
enjoyments; but these are by no means the same thing, for the vehemence
of our passions is irritated, not less by disappointment than by the
prospect of success. Nothing seems to be a match for this general
tenaciousness of existence, but such an extremity either of bodily or
mental suffering as destroys at once the power both of habit and
imagination. In short, the question, whether life is accompanied with a
greater quantity of pleasure or pain, may be fairly set aside as
frivolous, and of no practical utility; for our attachment to life
depends on our interest in it; and it cannot be denied that we have more
interest in this moving, busy scene, agitated with a thousand hopes and
fears, and checkered with every diversity of joy and sorrow, than in a
dreary blank. To be something is better than to be nothing, because we
can feel no interest in _nothing_. Passion, imagination, self-will, the
sense of power, the very consciousness of our existence, bind us to
life, and hold us fast in its chains, as by a magic spell, in spite of
every other consideration. Nothing can be more philosophical than the
reasoning which Milton puts into the mouth of the fallen angel:—

             ‘And that must end us, that must be our cure,
             To be no more; Sad cure: For who would lose,
             Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
             Those thoughts that wander through eternity,
             To perish rather, swallow’d up and lost
             In the wide womb of uncreated night,
             Devoid of sense and motion?’

Nearly the same account may be given in answer to the question which has
been asked, _Why so few tyrants kill themselves?_ In the first place,
they are never satisfied with the mischief they have done, and cannot
quit their hold of power, after all sense of pleasure is fled. Besides,
they absurdly argue from the means of happiness placed within their
reach to the end itself; and, dazzled by the pomp and pageantry of a
throne, cannot relinquish the persuasion that they _ought_ to be happier
than other men. The prejudice of opinion, which attaches us to life, is
in them stronger than in others, and incorrigible to experience. The
Great are life’s fools—dupes of the splendid shadows that surround them,
and wedded to the very mockeries of opinion.

Whatever is our situation or pursuit in life, the result will be much
the same. The strength of the passion seldom corresponds to the pleasure
we find in its indulgence. The miser ‘robs himself to increase his
store’; the ambitious man toils up a slippery precipice only to be
tumbled headlong from its height: the lover is infatuated with the
charms of his mistress, exactly in proportion to the mortifications he
has received from her. Even those who succeed in nothing, who, as it has
been emphatically expressed—

             ‘Are made desperate by too quick a sense
             Of constant infelicity; cut off
             From peace like exiles, on some barren rock,
             Their life’s sad prison, with no more of ease,
             Than sentinels between two armies set’;

are yet as unwilling as others to give over the unprofitable strife:
their harassed feverish existence refuses rest, and frets the languor of
exhausted hope into the torture of unavailing regret. The exile, who has
been unexpectedly restored to his country and to liberty, often finds
his courage fail with the accomplishment of all his wishes, and the
struggle of life and hope ceases at the same instant.

We once more repeat, that we do not, in the foregoing remarks, mean to
enter into a comparative estimate of the value of human life, but merely
to shew that the strength of our attachment to it is a very fallacious
test of its happiness.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 2.]                 ON CLASSICAL EDUCATION          [FEB. 12, 1815.

The study of the Classics is less to be regarded as an exercise of the
intellect, than as ‘a discipline of humanity.’ The peculiar advantage of
this mode of education consists not so much in strengthening the
understanding, as in softening and refining the taste. It gives men
liberal views; it accustoms the mind to take an interest in things
foreign to itself; to love virtue for its own sake; to prefer fame to
life, and glory to riches; and to fix our thoughts on the remote and
permanent, instead of narrow and fleeting objects. It teaches us to
believe that there is something really great and excellent in the world,
surviving all the shocks of accident and fluctuations of opinion, and
raises us above that low and servile fear, which bows only to present
power and upstart authority. Rome and Athens filled a place in the
history of mankind, which can never be occupied again. They were two
cities set on a hill, which could not be hid; all eyes have seen them,
and their light shines like a mighty sea-mark into the abyss of time.

           ‘Still green with bays each ancient altar stands,
           Above the reach of sacrilegious hands;
           Secure from flames, from envy’s fiercer rage,
           Destructive war, and all-involving age.

           Hail, bards triumphant, born in happier days,
           Immortal heirs of universal praise!
           Whose honours with increase of ages grow,
           As streams roll down, enlarging as they flow!’

It is this feeling, more than anything else, which produces a marked
difference between the study of the ancient and modern languages, and
which, from the weight and importance of the consequences attached to
the former, stamps every word with a monumental firmness. By conversing
with the _mighty dead_, we imbibe sentiment with knowledge; we become
strongly attached to those who can no longer either hurt or serve us,
except through the influence which they exert over the mind. We feel the
presence of that power which gives immortality to human thoughts and
actions, and catch the flame of enthusiasm from all nations and ages.

It is hard to find in minds otherwise formed, either a real love of
excellence, or a belief that any excellence exists superior to their
own. Everything is brought down to the vulgar level of their own ideas
and pursuits. Persons without education certainly do not want either
acuteness or strength of mind in what concerns themselves, or in things
immediately within their observation; but they have no power of
abstraction, no general standard of taste, or scale of opinion. They see
their objects always near, and never in the horizon. Hence arises that
egotism which has been remarked as the characteristic of self-taught
men, and which degenerates into obstinate prejudice or petulant
fickleness of opinion, according to the natural sluggishness or activity
of their minds. For they either become blindly bigoted to the first
opinions they have struck out for themselves, and inaccessible to
conviction; or else (the dupes of their own vanity and shrewdness) are
everlasting converts to every crude suggestion that presents itself, and
the last opinion is always the true one. Each successive discovery
flashes upon them with equal light and evidence, and every new fact
overturns their whole system. It is among this class of persons, whose
ideas never extend beyond the feeling of the moment, that we find
partizans, who are very honest men, with a total want of principle, and
who unite the most hardened effrontery, and intolerance of opinion, to
endless inconsistency and self-contradiction.

A celebrated political writer of the present day, who is a great enemy
to classical education, is a remarkable instance both of what can and
what cannot be done without it.

It has been attempted of late to set up a distinction between the
education _of words_, and the education _of things_, and to give the
preference in all cases to the latter. But, in the first place, the
knowledge of things, or of the realities of life, is not easily to be
taught except by things themselves, and, even if it were, is not so
absolutely indispensable as it has been supposed. ‘The world is too much
with us, early and late’; and the fine dream of our youth is best
prolonged among the visionary objects of antiquity. We owe many of our
most amiable delusions, and some of our superiority, to the grossness of
mere physical existence, to the strength of our associations with words.
Language, if it throws a veil over our ideas, adds a softness and
refinement to them, like that which the atmosphere gives to naked
objects. There can be no true elegance without taste in style. In the
next place, we mean absolutely to deny the application of the principle
of utility to the present question. By an obvious transposition of
ideas, some persons have confounded a knowledge of useful things with
useful knowledge. Knowledge is only useful in itself, as it exercises or
gives pleasure to the mind: the only knowledge that is of use in a
practical sense, is professional knowledge. But knowledge, considered as
a branch of general education, can be of use only to the mind of the
person acquiring it. If the knowledge of language produces pedants, the
other kind of knowledge (which is proposed to be substituted for it) can
only produce quacks. There is no question, but that the knowledge of
astronomy, of chemistry, and of agriculture, is highly useful to the
world, and absolutely necessary to be acquired by persons carrying on
certain professions: but the practical utility of a knowledge of these
subjects ends there. For example, it is of the utmost importance to the
navigator to know exactly in what degree of longitude and latitude such
a rock lies: but to us, sitting here about our Round Table, it is not of
the smallest consequence whatever, whether the map-maker has placed it
an inch to the right or to the left; we are in no danger of running
against it. So the art of making shoes is a highly useful art, and very
proper to be known and practised by some body: that is, by the
shoemaker. But to pretend that every one else should be thoroughly
acquainted with the whole process of this ingenious handicraft, as one
branch of useful knowledge, would be preposterous. It is sometimes
asked, What is the use of poetry? and we have heard the argument carried
on almost like a parody on _Falstaff’s_ reasoning about Honour. ‘Can it
set a leg? No. Or an arm? No. Or take away the grief of a wound? No.
Poetry hath no skill in surgery then? No.’ It is likely that the most
enthusiastic lover of poetry would so far agree to the truth of this
statement, that if he had just broken a leg, he would send for a
surgeon, instead of a volume of poems from a library. But, ‘they that
are whole need not a physician.’ The reasoning would be well founded, if
we lived in an hospital, and not in the world.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 3.]                      ON THE TATLER              [MARCH 5, 1815.

Of all the periodical Essayists, (our ingenious predecessors), the
_Tatler_ has always appeared to us the most accomplished and agreeable.
Montaigne, who was the father of this kind of personal authorship among
the moderns, in which the reader is admitted behind the curtain, and
sits down with the writer in his gown and slippers, was a most
magnanimous and undisguised egotist; but Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq. was the
more disinterested gossip of the two. The French author is contented to
describe the peculiarities of his own mind and person, which he does
with a most copious and unsparing hand. The English journalist,
good-naturedly, lets you into the secret both of his own affairs and
those of his neighbours. A young lady, on the other side of Temple Bar,
cannot be seen at her glass for half a day together, but Mr. Bickerstaff
takes due notice of it; and he has the first intelligence of the
symptoms of the _belle_ passion appearing in any young gentleman at the
west end of the town. The departures and arrivals of widows with
handsome jointures, either to bury their grief in the country, or to
procure a second husband in town, are regularly recorded in his pages.
He is well acquainted with the celebrated beauties of the last age at
the Court of Charles II. and the old gentleman often grows romantic in
recounting the disastrous strokes which his youth suffered from the
glances of their bright eyes and their unaccountable caprices. In
particular, he dwells with a secret satisfaction on one of his
mistresses who left him for a rival, and whose constant reproach to her
husband, on occasion of any quarrel between them, was,—‘I, that might
have married the famous Mr. Bickerstaff, to be treated in this manner!’
The club at the _Trumpet_ consists of a set of persons as entertaining
as himself. The cavalcade of the justice of the peace, the knight of the
shire, the country squire, and the young gentleman, his nephew, who
waited on him at his chambers, in such form and ceremony, seem not to
have settled the order of their precedence to this hour; and we should
hope the Upholsterer and his companions in the Green Park stand as fair
a chance for immortality as some modern politicians. Mr. Bickerstaff
himself is a gentleman and a scholar, a humourist and a man of the
world; with a great deal of nice easy _naïveté_ about him. If he walks
out and is caught in a shower of rain, he makes us amends for this
unlucky accident, by a criticism on the shower in Virgil, and concludes
with a burlesque copy of verses on a city-shower. He entertains us, when
he dates from his own apartment, with a quotation from Plutarch or a
moral reflection; from the Grecian coffeehouse with politics; and from
Will’s or the Temple with the poets and players, the beaux and men of
wit and pleasure about town. In reading the pages of the _Tatler_, we
seem as if suddenly transported to the age of Queen Anne, of toupees and
full-bottomed periwigs. The whole appearance of our dress and manners
undergoes a delightful metamorphosis. We are surprised with the rustling
of hoops and the glittering of paste buckles. The beaux and the belles
are of a quite different species; we distinguish the dappers, the
smarts, and the pretty fellows, as they pass; we are introduced to
Betterton and Mrs. Oldfield behind the scenes; are made familiar with
the persons of Mr. Penkethman and Mr. Bullock; we listen to a dispute at
a tavern on the merits of the Duke of Marlborough or Marshal Turenne; or
are present at the first rehearsal of a play by Vanbrugh, or the reading
of a new poem by Mr. Pope.—The privilege of thus virtually transporting
ourselves to past times, is even greater than that of visiting distant
places. London, a hundred years ago, would be better worth seeing than
Paris at the present moment.

It may be said that all this is to be found, in the same or a greater
degree, in the _Spectator_. We do not think so; or, at least, there is
in the last work a much greater proportion of common-place matter. We
have always preferred the _Tatler_ to the _Spectator_. Whether it is
owing to our having been earlier or better acquainted with the one than
the other, our pleasure in reading the two works is not at all in
proportion to their comparative reputation. The _Tatler_ contains only
half the number of volumes, and we will venture to say, at least an
equal quantity of sterling wit and sense. ‘The first sprightly runnings’
are there: it has more of the original spirit, more of the freshness and
stamp of nature. The indications of character and strokes of humour are
more true and frequent, the reflections that suggest themselves arise
more from the occasion, and are less spun out into regular
dissertations. They are more like the remarks which occur in sensible
conversation, and less like a lecture. Something is left to the
understanding of the reader. Steele seems to have gone into his closet
only to set down what he observed out-of-doors; Addison seems to have
spun out and wire-drawn the hints, which he borrowed from Steele, or
took from nature, to the utmost. We do not mean to depreciate Addison’s
talents, but we wish to do justice to Steele, who was, upon the whole, a
less artificial and more original writer. The descriptions of Steele
resemble loose sketches or fragments of a comedy; those of Addison are
ingenious paraphrases on the genuine text. The characters of the club,
not only in the _Tatler_, but in the _Spectator_, were drawn by Steele.
That of Sir Roger de Coverley is among them. Addison has gained himself
eternal honour by his manner of filling up this last character. Those of
Will Wimble and Will Honeycomb are not a whit behind it in delicacy and
felicity. Many of the most exquisite pieces in the _Tatler_ are also
Addison’s, as the Court of Honour, and the Personification of Musical
Instruments. We do not know whether the picture of the family of an old
acquaintance, in which the children run to let Mr. Bickerstaff in at the
door, and the one that loses the race that way turns back to tell the
father that he is come,—with the nice gradation of incredulity in the
little boy, who is got into _Guy of Warwick_ and _The Seven Champions_,
and who shakes his head at the veracity of _Æsop’s Fables_,—is Steele’s
or Addison’s.[30] The account of the two sisters, one of whom held her
head up higher than ordinary, from having on a pair of flowered garters,
and of the married lady who complained to the _Tatler_ of the neglect of
her husband, are unquestionably Steele’s. If the _Tatler_ is not
inferior to the _Spectator_ in manners and character, it is very
superior to it in the interest of many of the stories. Several of the
incidents related by Steele have never been surpassed in the
heart-rending pathos of private distress. We might refer to those of the
lover and his mistress when the theatre caught fire, of the bridegroom
who, by accident, kills his bride on the day of their marriage, the
story of Mr. Eustace and his wife, and the fine dream about his own
mistress when a youth. What has given its superior popularity to the
_Spectator_, is the greater gravity of its pretensions, its moral
dissertations and critical reasonings, by which we confess we are less
edified than by other things. Systems and opinions change, but nature is
always true. It is the extremely moral and didactic tone of the
_Spectator_ which makes us apt to think of Addison (according to
Mandeville’s sarcasm) as ‘a parson in a tie-wig.’ Some of the moral
essays are, however, exquisitely beautiful and happy. Such are the
reflections in Westminster Abbey, on the Royal Exchange, and some very
affecting ones on the death of a young lady. These, it must be allowed,
are the perfection of elegant sermonising. His critical essays we do not
think quite so good. We prefer Steele’s occasional selection of
beautiful poetical passages, without any affectation of analysing their
beauties, to Addison’s fine-spun theories. The best criticism in the
_Spectator_, that on the _Cartoons_ of Raphael, is by Steele. We owed
this acknowledgment to a writer who has so often put us in good humour
with ourselves and every thing about us, when few things else could.[31]

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 4.]                    ON MODERN COMEDY             [AUG. 20, 1815.

The question which has often been asked, _Why there are so few good
modern Comedies?_ appears in a great measure to answer itself. It is
because so many excellent Comedies have been written, that there are
none written at present. Comedy naturally wears itself out—destroys the
very food on which it lives; and by constantly and successfully exposing
the follies and weaknesses of mankind to ridicule, in the end leaves
itself nothing worth laughing at. It holds the mirror up to nature; and
men, seeing their most striking peculiarities and defects pass in gay
review before them, learn either to avoid or conceal them. It is not the
criticism which the public taste exercises upon the stage, but the
criticism which the stage exercises upon public manners, that is fatal
to comedy, by rendering the subject-matter of it tame, correct, and
spiritless. We are drilled into a sort of stupid decorum, and forced to
wear the same dull uniform of outward appearance; and yet it is asked,
why the Comic Muse does not point, as she was wont, at the peculiarities
of our gait and gesture, and exhibit the picturesque contrast of our
dress and costume, in all that graceful variety in which she delights.
The genuine source of comic writing,

             ‘Where it must live, or have no life at all,’

is undoubtedly to be found in the distinguishing peculiarities of men
and manners. Now, this distinction can subsist, so as to be strong,
pointed, and general, only while the manners of different classes are
formed immediately by their particular circumstances, and the characters
of individuals by their natural temperament and situation, without being
everlastingly modified and neutralised by intercourse with the world—by
knowledge and education. In a certain stage of society, men may be said
to vegetate like trees, and to become rooted to the soil in which they
grow. They have no idea of anything beyond themselves and their
immediate sphere of action; they are, as it were, circumscribed, and
defined by their particular circumstances; they are what their situation
makes them, and nothing more. Each is absorbed in his own profession or
pursuit, and each in his turn contracts that habitual peculiarity of
manners and opinions, which makes him the subject of ridicule to others,
and the sport of the Comic Muse. Thus the physician is nothing but a
physician, the lawyer is a mere lawyer, the scholar degenerates into a
pedant, the country squire is a different species of being from the fine
gentleman, the citizen and the courtier inhabit a different world, and
even the affectation of certain characters, in aping the follies or
vices of their betters, only serves to show the immeasurable distance
which custom or fortune has placed between them. Hence the early comic
writers, taking advantage of this mixed and solid mass of ignorance,
folly, pride, and prejudice, made those deep and lasting incisions into
it,—have given those sharp and nice touches, that bold relief to their
characters,—have opposed them in every variety of contrast and
collision, of conscious self-satisfaction and mutual antipathy, with a
power which can only find full scope in the same rich and inexhaustible
materials. But in proportion as comic genius succeeds in taking off the
mask from ignorance and conceit, as it teaches us to

                   ‘See ourselves as others see us,’—

in proportion as we are brought out on the stage together, and our
prejudices clash one against the other, our sharp angular points wear
off; we are no longer rigid in absurdity, passionate in folly, and we
prevent the ridicule directed at our habitual foibles, by laughing at
them ourselves.

If it be said, that there is the same fund of absurdity and prejudice in
the world as ever—that there are the same unaccountable perversities
lurking at the bottom of every breast,—I should answer, be it so: but at
least we keep our follies to ourselves as much as possible—we palliate,
shuffle, and equivocate with them—they sneak into by-corners, and do
not, like _Chaucer’s Canterbury Pilgrims_, march along the highroad, and
form a procession—they do not entrench themselves strongly behind custom
and precedent—they are not embodied in professions and ranks in
life—they are not organised into a system—they do not openly resort to a
standard, but are a sort of straggling nondescripts, that, like _Wart_,
‘present no mark to the foeman.’ As to the gross and palpable
absurdities of modern manners, they are too shallow and barefaced, and
those who affect, are too little _serious_ in them, to make them worth
the detection of the Comic Muse. They proceed from an idle, impudent
affectation of folly in general, in the dashing _bravura_ style, not
from an infatuation with any of its characteristic modes. In short, the
proper object of ridicule is _egotism_; and a man cannot be a very great
egotist who every day sees himself represented on the stage. We are
deficient in Comedy, because we are without characters in real life—as
we have no historical pictures, because we have no faces proper for
them.

It is, indeed, the evident tendency of all literature to generalise and
_dissipate_ character, by giving men the same artificial education, and
the same common stock of ideas; so that we see all objects from the same
point of view, and through the same reflected medium;—we learn to exist,
not in ourselves, but in books;—all men become alike mere
readers—spectators, not actors in the scene, and lose all proper
personal identity. The templar, the wit, the man of pleasure, and the
man of fashion, the courtier and the citizen, the knight and the squire,
the lover and the miser—_Lovelace_, _Lothario_, _Will Honeycomb_, and
_Sir Roger de Coverley_, _Sparkish_ and _Lord Foppington_, _Western_ and
_Tom Jones_, _My Father_, and _My Uncle Toby_, _Millamant_ and _Sir
Sampson Legend_, _Don Quixote_ and _Sancho_, _Gil Blas_ and _Guzman
d’Alfarache_, _Count Fathom_ and _Joseph Surface_,—have all met, and
exchanged common-places on the barren plains of the _haute
littérature_—toil slowly on to the Temple of Science, seen a long way
off upon a level, and end in one dull compound of politics, criticism,
chemistry, and metaphysics!

We cannot expect to reconcile opposite things. If, for example, any of
us were to put ourselves into the stage-coach from Salisbury to London,
it is more than probable we should not meet with the same number of odd
accidents, or ludicrous distresses on the road, that befell _Parson
Adams_; but why, if we get into a common vehicle, and submit to the
conveniences of modern travelling, should we complain of the want of
adventures? Modern manners may be compared to a modern stage-coach: our
limbs may be a little cramped with the confinement, and we may grow
drowsy; but we arrive safe, without any very amusing or very sad
accident, at our journey’s end.

Again, the alterations which have taken place in conversation and dress
in the same period, have been by no means favourable to Comedy. The
present prevailing style of conversation is not _personal_, but critical
and analytical. It consists almost entirely in the discussion of general
topics, in dissertations on philosophy or taste: and Congreve would be
able to derive no better hints from the conversations of our toilettes
or drawing-rooms, for the exquisite raillery or poignant repartee of his
dialogues, than from a deliberation of the Royal Society. In the same
manner, the extreme simplicity and graceful uniformity of modern dress,
however favourable to the arts, has certainly stript Comedy of one of
its richest ornaments and most expressive symbols. The sweeping pall and
buskin, and nodding plume, were never more serviceable to Tragedy, than
the enormous hoops and stiff stays worn by the belles of former days
were to the intrigues of Comedy. They assisted wonderfully in
heightening the mysteries of the passion, and adding to the intricacy of
the plot. Wycherley and Vanbrugh could not have spared the dresses of
Vandyke. These strange fancy-dresses, perverse disguises, and
counterfeit shapes, gave an agreeable scope to the imagination. ‘That
sevenfold fence’ was a sort of foil to the lusciousness of the dialogue,
and a barrier against the sly encroachments of _double entendre_. The
greedy eye and bold hand of indiscretion were repressed, which gave a
greater licence to the tongue. The senses were not to be gratified in an
instant. Love was entangled in the folds of the swelling handkerchief,
and the desires might wander for ever round the circumference of a
quilted petticoat, or find a rich lodging in the flowers of a damask
stomacher. There was room for years of patient contrivance, for a
thousand thoughts, schemes, conjectures, hopes, fears, and wishes. There
seemed no end of difficulties and delays; to overcome so many obstacles
was the work of ages. A mistress was an angel concealed behind
whalebone, flounces, and brocade. What an undertaking to penetrate
through the disguise! What an impulse must it give to the blood, what a
keenness to the invention, what a volubility to the tongue! ‘Mr. Smirk,
you are a brisk man,’ was then the most significant commendation. But
now-a-days—a woman can be _but undressed_!

The same account might be extended to Tragedy. Aristotle has long since
said, that Tragedy purifies the mind by terror and pity; that is,
substitutes an artificial and intellectual interest for real passion.
Tragedy, like Comedy, must therefore defeat itself; for its patterns
must be drawn from the living models within the breast, from feeling or
from observation; and the materials of Tragedy cannot be found among a
people, who are the habitual spectators of Tragedy, whose interests and
passions are not their own, but ideal, remote, sentimental, and
abstracted. It is for this reason chiefly, we conceive, that the highest
efforts of the Tragic Muse are in general the earliest; where the strong
impulses of nature are not lost in the refinements and glosses of art;
where the writers themselves, and those whom they saw about them, had
‘warm hearts of flesh and blood beating in their bosoms, and were not
embowelled of their natural entrails, and stuffed with paltry blurred
sheets of paper.’ Shakspeare, with all his genius, could not have
written as he did, if he had lived in the present times. Nature would
not have presented itself to him in the same freshness and vigour; he
must have seen it through all the refractions of successive dullness,
and his powers would have languished in the dense atmosphere of logic
and criticism. ‘Men’s minds,’ he somewhere says, ‘are parcel of their
fortunes’; and his age was necessary to him. It was this which enabled
him to grapple at once with Nature, and which stamped his characters
with her image and superscription.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 5.]                   ON MR. KEAN’S IAGO            [JULY 24, 1814.

We certainly think Mr. Kean’s performance of the part of Iago one of the
most extraordinary exhibitions on the stage. There is no one within our
remembrance who has so completely foiled the critics as this celebrated
actor: one sagacious person imagines that he must perform a part in a
certain manner,—another virtuoso chalks out a different path for him;
and when the time comes, he does the whole off in a way that neither of
them had the least conception of, and which both of them are therefore
very ready to condemn as entirely wrong. It was ever the trick of genius
to be thus. We confess that Mr. Kean has thrown us out more than once.
For instance, we are very much inclined to adopt the opinion of a
contemporary critic, that his _Richard_ is not gay enough, and that his
_Iago_ is not grave enough. This he may perhaps conceive to be the mere
caprice of idle criticism; but we will try to give our reasons, and
shall leave them to Mr. Kean’s better judgment. It is to be remembered,
then, that _Richard_ was a princely villain, borne along in a sort of
triumphal car of royal state, buoyed up with the hopes and privileges of
his birth, reposing even on the sanctity of religion, trampling on his
devoted victims without remorse, and who looked out and laughed from the
high watch-tower of his confidence and his expectations on the
desolation and misery he had caused around him. He held on his way,
unquestioned, ‘hedged in with the divinity of kings,’ amenable to no
tribunal, and abusing his power _in contempt of mankind_. But as for
_Iago_, we conceive differently of him. He had not the same natural
advantages. He was a mere adventurer in mischief, a pains-taking
plodding knave, without patent or pedigree, who was obliged to work his
up-hill way by wit, not by will, and to be the founder of his own
fortune. He was, if we may be allowed a vulgar allusion, a sort of
prototype of modern Jacobinism, who thought that talents ought to decide
the place,—a man of ‘morbid sensibility,’ (in the fashionable phrase),
full of distrust, of hatred, of anxious and corroding thoughts, and who,
though he might assume a temporary superiority over others by superior
adroitness, and pride himself in his skill, could not be supposed to
assume it as a matter of course, as if he had been entitled to it from
his birth. We do not here mean to enter into the characters of the two
men, but something must be allowed to the difference of their
situations. There might be the same insensibility in both as to the end
in view, but there could not well be the same security as to the success
of the means. _Iago_ had to pass through a different ordeal: he had no
appliances and means to boot; no royal road to the completion of his
tragedy. His pretensions were not backed by authority; they were not
baptized at the font; they were not holy-waterproof. He had the whole to
answer for in his own person, and could not shift the responsibility to
the heads of others. Mr. Kean’s _Richard_ was, therefore, we think,
deficient in something of that regal jollity and reeling triumph of
success which the part would bear; but this we can easily account for,
because it is the traditional commonplace idea of the character, that he
is to ‘play the dog—to bite and snarl.’—The extreme unconcern and
laboured levity of his _Iago_, on the contrary, is a refinement and
original device of the actor’s own mind, and therefore deserves
consideration. The character of _Iago_, in fact, belongs to a class of
characters common to Shakspeare, and at the same time peculiar to
him—namely, that of great intellectual activity, accompanied with a
total want of moral principle, and therefore displaying itself at the
constant expence of others, making use of reason as a pander to
will—employing its ingenuity and its resources to palliate its own
crimes and aggravate the faults of others, and seeking to confound the
practical distinctions of right and wrong, by referring them to some
overstrained standard of speculative refinement.—Some persons, more nice
than wise, have thought the whole of the character of _Iago_ unnatural.
Shakspeare, who was quite as good a philosopher as he was a poet,
thought otherwise. He knew that the love of power, which is another name
for the love of mischief, was natural to man. He would know this as well
or better than if it had been demonstrated to him by a logical diagram,
merely from seeing children paddle in the dirt, or kill flies for sport.
We might ask those who think the character of _Iago_ not natural, why
they go to see it performed, but from the interest it excites, the
sharper edge which it sets on their curiosity and imagination? Why do we
go to see tragedies in general? Why do we always read the accounts in
the newspapers of dreadful fires and shocking murders, but for the same
reason? Why do so many persons frequent executions and trials, or why do
the lower classes almost universally take delight in barbarous sports
and cruelty to animals, but because there is a natural tendency in the
mind to strong excitement, a desire to have its faculties roused and
stimulated to the utmost? Whenever this principle is not under the
restraint of humanity, or the sense of moral obligation, there are no
excesses to which it will not of itself give rise, without the
assistance of any other motive, either of passion or self-interest.
_Iago_ is only an extreme instance of the kind; that is, of diseased
intellectual activity, with an almost perfect indifference to moral good
or evil, or rather with a preference of the latter, because it falls
more in with his favourite propensity, gives greater zest to his
thoughts, and scope to his actions.—Be it observed, too, (for the sake
of those who are for squaring all human actions by the maxims of
Rochefoucault), that he is quite or nearly as indifferent to his own
fate as to that of others; that he runs all risks for a trifling and
doubtful advantage; and is himself the dupe and victim of his ruling
passion—an incorrigible love of mischief—an insatiable craving after
action of the most difficult and dangerous kind. Our ‘Ancient’ is a
philosopher, who fancies that a lie that kills has more point in it than
an alliteration or an antithesis; who thinks a fatal experiment on the
peace of a family a better thing than watching the palpitations in the
heart of a flea in an air-pump; who plots the ruin of his friends as an
exercise for his understanding, and stabs men in the dark to prevent
_ennui_. Now this, though it be sport, yet it is dreadful sport. There
is no room for trifling and indifference, nor scarcely for the
appearance of it; the very object of his whole plot is to keep his
faculties stretched on the rack, in a state of watch and ward, in a sort
of breathless suspense, without a moment’s interval of repose. He has a
desperate stake to play for, like a man who fences with poisoned
weapons, and has business enough on his hands to call for the whole
stock of his sober circumspection, his dark duplicity, and insidious
gravity. He resembles a man who sits down to play at chess, for the sake
of the difficulty and complication of the game, and who immediately
becomes absorbed in it. His amusements, if they are amusements, are
severe and saturnine—even his wit blisters. His gaiety arises from the
success of his treachery; his ease from the sense of the torture he has
inflicted on others. Even, if other circumstances permitted it, the part
he has to play with _Othello_ requires that he should assume the most
serious concern, and something of the plausibility of a confessor. ‘His
cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o’ Bedlam.’ He is
repeatedly called ‘honest _Iago_,’ which looks as if there were
something suspicious in his appearance, which admitted a different
construction. The tone which he adopts in the scenes with _Roderigo_,
_Desdemona_, and _Cassio_, is only a relaxation from the more arduous
business of the play. Yet there is in all his conversation an inveterate
misanthropy, a licentious keenness of perception, which is always
sagacious of evil, and snuffs up the tainted scent of its quarry with
rancorous delight. An exuberance of spleen is the essence of the
character. The view which we have here taken of the subject (if at all
correct) will not therefore justify the extreme alteration which Mr.
Kean has introduced into the part. Actors in general have been struck
only with the wickedness of the character, and have exhibited an
assassin going to the place of execution. Mr. Kean has abstracted the
wit of the character, and makes _Iago_ appear throughout an excellent
good fellow, and lively bottle-companion. But though we do not wish him
to be represented as a monster, or fiend, we see no reason why he should
instantly be converted into a pattern of comic gaiety and good-humour.
The light which illumines the character should rather resemble the
flashes of lightning in the mirky sky, which make the darkness more
terrible. Mr. Kean’s _Iago_ is, we suspect, too much in the sun. His
manner of acting the part would have suited better with the character of
_Edmund_ in _King Lear_, who, though in other respects much the same,
has a spice of gallantry in his constitution, and has the favour and
countenance of the ladies, which always gives a man the smug appearance
of a bridegroom!

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 6.]               ON THE LOVE OF THE COUNTRY        [NOV. 27, 1814.

                   TO THE EDITOR OF THE ROUND TABLE.

SIR,—I do not know that any one has ever explained satisfactorily the
true source of our attachment to natural objects, or of that soothing
emotion which the sight of the country hardly ever fails to infuse into
the mind. Some persons have ascribed this feeling to the natural beauty
of the objects themselves, others to the freedom from care, the silence
and tranquillity which scenes of retirement afford—others to the healthy
and innocent employments of a country life—others to the simplicity of
country manners—and others to different causes; but none to the right
one. All these causes may, I believe, have a share in producing this
feeling; but there is another more general principle, which has been
left untouched, and which I shall here explain, endeavouring to be as
little sentimental as the subject will admit.

Rousseau, in his Confessions, (the most valuable of all his works),
relates, that when he took possession of his room at Annecy, at the
house of his beloved mistress and friend, he found that he could see ‘a
little spot of green’ from his window, which endeared his situation the
more to him, because, he says, it was the first time he had had this
object constantly before him since he left Boissy, the place where he
was at school when a child.[32] Some such feeling as that here described
will be found lurking at the bottom of all our attachments of this sort.
Were it not for the recollections habitually associated with them,
natural objects could not interest the mind in the manner they do. No
doubt, the sky is beautiful; the clouds sail majestically along its
bosom; the sun is cheering; there is something exquisitely graceful in
the manner in which a plant or tree puts forth its branches; the motion
with which they bend and tremble in the evening breeze is soft and
lovely; there is music in the babbling of a brook; the view from the top
of a mountain is full of grandeur; nor can we behold the ocean with
indifference. Or, as the Minstrel sweetly sings—

         ‘Oh how can’st thou renounce the boundless store
         Of charms which Nature to her votary yields!
         The warbling woodland, the resounding shore,
         The pomp of groves, and garniture of fields;
         All that the genial ray of morning gilds,
         And all that echoes to the song of even,
         All that the mountain’s sheltering bosom shields,
         And all the dread magnificence of heaven,
         Oh how can’st thou renounce, and hope to be forgiven!’

It is not, however, the beautiful and magnificent alone that we admire
in Nature; the most insignificant and rudest objects are often found
connected with the strongest emotions; we become attached to the most
common and familiar images as to the face of a friend whom we have long
known, and from whom we have received many benefits. It is because
natural objects have been associated with the sports of our childhood,
with air and exercise, with our feelings in solitude, when the mind
takes the strongest hold of things, and clings with the fondest interest
to whatever strikes its attention; with change of place, the pursuit of
new scenes, and thoughts of distant friends: it is because they have
surrounded us in almost all situations, in joy and in sorrow, in
pleasure and in pain; because they have been one chief source and
nourishment of our feelings, and a part of our being, that we love them
as we do ourselves.

There is, generally speaking, the same foundation for our love of Nature
as for all our habitual attachments, namely, association of ideas. But
this is not all. That which distinguishes this attachment from others is
the transferable nature of our feelings with respect to physical
objects; the associations connected with any one object extending to the
whole class. My having been attached to any particular person does not
make me feel the same attachment to the next person I may chance to
meet; but, if I have once associated strong feelings of delight with the
objects of natural scenery, the tie becomes indissoluble, and I shall
ever after feel the same attachment to other objects of the same sort. I
remember when I was abroad, the trees, and grass, and wet leaves,
rustling in the walks of the Thuilleries, seemed to be as much English,
to be as much the same trees and grass, that I had always been used to,
as the sun shining over my head was the same sun which I saw in England;
the faces only were foreign to me. Whence comes this difference? It
arises from our always imperceptibly connecting the idea of the
individual with man, and only the idea of the class with natural
objects. In the one case, the external appearance or physical structure
is the least thing to be attended to; in the other, it is every thing.
The springs that move the human form, and make it friendly or adverse to
me, lie hid within it. There is an infinity of motives, passions, and
ideas contained in that narrow compass, of which I know nothing, and in
which I have no share. Each individual is a world to himself, governed
by a thousand contradictory and wayward impulses. I can, therefore, make
no inference from one individual to another; nor can my habitual
sentiments, with respect to any individual, extend beyond himself to
others. But it is otherwise with respect to Nature. There is neither
hypocrisy, caprice, nor mental reservation in her favours. Our
intercourse with her is not liable to accident or change, interruption
or disappointment. She smiles on us still the same. Thus, to give an
obvious instance, if I have once enjoyed the cool shade of a tree, and
been lulled into a deep repose by the sound of a brook running at its
feet, I am sure that wherever I can find a tree and a brook, I can enjoy
the same pleasure again. Hence, when I imagine these objects, I can
easily form a mystic personification of the friendly power that inhabits
them, Dryad or Naiad, offering its cool fountain or its tempting shade.
Hence the origin of the Grecian mythology. All objects of the same kind
being the same, not only in their appearance, but in their practical
uses, we habitually confound them together under the same general idea;
and, whatever fondness we may have conceived for one, is immediately
placed to the common account. The most opposite kinds and remote trains
of feeling gradually go to enrich the same sentiment; and in our love of
Nature, there is all the force of individual attachment, combined with
the most airy abstraction. It is this circumstance which gives that
refinement, expansion, and wild interest to feelings of this sort, when
strongly excited, which every one must have experienced who is a true
lover of Nature. The sight of the setting sun does not affect me so much
from the beauty of the object itself, from the glory kindled through the
glowing skies, the rich broken columns of light, or the dying streaks of
day, as that it indistinctly recalls to me numberless thoughts and
feelings with which, through many a year and season, I have watched his
bright descent in the warm summer evenings, or beheld him struggling to
cast a ‘farewel sweet’ through the thick clouds of winter. I love to see
the trees first covered with leaves in the spring, the primroses peeping
out from some sheltered bank, and the innocent lambs running races on
the soft green turf; because, at that birth-time of Nature, I have
always felt sweet hopes and happy wishes—which have not been fulfilled!
The dry reeds rustling on the side of a stream,—the woods swept by the
loud blast,—the dark massy foliage of autumn,—the grey trunks and naked
branches of the trees in winter,—the sequestered copse and wide extended
heath,—the warm sunny showers, and December snows,—have all charms for
me; there is no object, however trifling or rude, that has not, in some
mood or other, found the way to my heart; and I might say, in the words
of the poet,

            ‘To me the meanest flower that blows can give
            Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.’

Thus Nature is a kind of universal home, and every object it presents to
us an old acquaintance with unaltered looks.

                ——‘Nature did ne’er betray
          The heart that lov’d her, but through all the years
          Of this our life, it is her privilege
          To lead from joy to joy.’

For there is that consent and mutual harmony among all her works, one
undivided spirit pervading them throughout, that, if we have once knit
ourselves in hearty fellowship to any of them, they will never
afterwards appear as strangers to us, but, which ever way we turn, we
shall find a secret power to have gone out before us, moulding them into
such shapes as fancy loves, informing them with life and sympathy,
bidding them put on their festive looks and gayest attire at our
approach, and to pour all their sweets and choicest treasures at our
feet. For him, then, who has well acquainted himself with Nature’s
works, she wears always one face, and speaks the same well-known
language, striking on the heart, amidst unquiet thoughts and the tumult
of the world, like the music of one’s native tongue heard in some
far-off country.

We do not connect the same feelings with the works of art as with those
of nature, because we refer them to man, and associate with them the
separate interests and passions which we know belong to those who are
the authors or possessors of them. Nevertheless, there are some such
objects, as a cottage, or a village church, which excite in us the same
sensations as the sight of nature, and which are, indeed, almost always
included in descriptions of natural scenery.

             ‘Or from the mountain’s sides
             View wilds and swelling floods,
             And hamlets brown, and dim-discover’d spires,
             And hear their simple bell.’

Which is in part, no doubt, because they are surrounded with natural
objects, and, in a populous country, inseparable from them; and also
because the human interest they excite relates to manners and feelings
which are simple, common, such as all can enter into, and which,
therefore, always produce a pleasing effect upon the mind.

                                                                      A.


 NO. 7.]               ON POSTHUMOUS FAME,—WHETHER        [MAY 22, 1814.
                   SHAKSPEARE WAS INFLUENCED BY A LOVE
                                 OF IT?

It has been much disputed whether Shakspeare was actuated by the love of
fame, though the question has been thought by others not to admit of any
doubt, on the ground that it was impossible for any man of great genius
to be without this feeling. It was supposed, that that immortality,
which was the natural inheritance of men of powerful genius, must be
ever present to their minds, as the reward, the object, and the
animating spring, of all their efforts. This conclusion does not appear
to be well founded, and that for the following reasons:

First, The love of fame is the offspring of taste, rather than of
genius. The love of fame implies a knowledge of its existence. The men
of the greatest genius, whether poets or philosophers, who lived in the
first ages of society, only just emerging from the gloom of ignorance
and barbarism, could not be supposed to have much idea of those long
trails of lasting glory which they were to leave behind them, and of
which there were as yet no examples. But, after such men, inspired by
the love of truth and nature, have struck out those lights which become
the gaze and admiration of after times,—when those who succeed in
distant generations read with wondering rapture the works which the
bards and sages of antiquity have bequeathed to them,—when they
contemplate the imperishable power of intellect which survives the
stroke of death and the revolutions of empire,—it is then that the
passion for fame becomes an habitual feeling in the mind, and that men
naturally wish to excite the same sentiments of admiration in others
which they themselves have felt, and to transmit their names with the
same honours to posterity. It is from the fond enthusiastic veneration
with which we recal the names of the celebrated men of past times, and
the idolatrous worship we pay to their memories, that we learn what a
delicious thing fame is, and would willingly make any efforts or
sacrifices to be thought of in the same way. It is in the true spirit of
this feeling that a modern writer exclaims—

              ‘Blessings be with them, and eternal praise,
              The poets—who on earth have made us heirs
              Of truth and pure delight in deathless lays!
              Oh! might my name be number’d among theirs,
              Then gladly would I end my mortal days!’

The love of fame is a species of emulation; or, in other words, the love
of admiration is in proportion to the admiration with which the works of
the highest genius have inspired us, to the delight we have received
from their habitual contemplation, and to our participation in the
general enthusiasm with which they have been regarded by mankind. Thus
there is little of this feeling discoverable in the Greek writers, whose
ideas of posthumous fame seem to have been confined to the glory of
heroic actions; whereas the Roman poets and orators, stimulated by the
reputation which their predecessors had acquired, and having those
exquisite models constantly before their eyes, are full of it. So
Milton, whose capacious mind was imbued with the rich stores of sacred
and of classic lore, to whom learning opened her inmost page, and whose
eye seemed to be ever bent back to the great models of antiquity, was,
it is evident, deeply impressed with a feeling of lofty emulation, and a
strong desire to produce some work of lasting and equal reputation:—

                            ——‘Nor sometimes forget
              Those other two, equall’d with me in fate,
              So were I equall’d with them in renown,
              Blind Thamyris and blind Mæonides,
              And Tiresias and Phineus, prophets old.’[33]

Spenser, who was a man of learning, had a high opinion of the regard due
to ‘famous poets’ wit’; and Lord Bacon, whose vanity is as well known as
his excessive adulation of that of others, asks, in a tone of proud
exultation, ‘Have not the poems of Homer lasted five-and-twenty hundred
years, and not a syllable of them is lost?’ Chaucer seems to have
derived his notions of fame more immediately from the reputation
acquired by the Italian poets, his contemporaries, which had at that
time spread itself over Europe; while the latter, who were the first to
unlock the springs of ancient learning, and who slaked their thirst of
knowledge at that pure fountain-head, would naturally imbibe the same
feeling from its highest source. Thus, Dante has conveyed the finest
image that can perhaps be conceived of the power of this principle over
the human mind, when he describes the heroes and celebrated men of
antiquity as ‘serene and smiling,’ though in the shades of death,

                      ——‘Because on earth their names
                In Fame’s eternal volume shine for aye.’

But it is not so in Shakspeare. There is scarcely the slightest trace of
any such feeling in his writings, nor any appearance of anxiety for
their fate, or of a desire to perfect them or make them worthy of that
immortality to which they were destined. And this indifference may be
accounted for from the very circumstance, that he was almost entirely a
man of genius, or that in him this faculty bore sway over every other:
he was either not intimately conversant with the productions of the
great writers who had gone before him, or at least was not much indebted
to them: he revelled in the world of observation and of fancy; and
perhaps his mind was of too prolific and active a kind to dwell with
intense and continued interest on the images of beauty or of grandeur
presented to it by the genius of others. He seemed scarcely to have an
individual existence of his own, but to borrow that of others at will,
and to pass successively through ‘every variety of untried being,’—to be
now _Hamlet_, now _Othello_, now _Lear_, now _Falstaff_, now _Ariel_. In
the mingled interests and feelings belonging to this wide range of
imaginary reality, in the tumult and rapid transitions of this waking
dream, the author could not easily find time to think of himself, nor
wish to embody that personal identity in idle reputation after death, of
which he was so little tenacious while living. To feel a strong desire
that others should think highly of us, it is, in general, necessary that
we should think highly of ourselves. There is something of egotism, and
even pedantry, in this sentiment; and there is no author who was so
little tinctured with these as Shakspeare. The passion for fame, like
other passions, requires an exclusive and exaggerated admiration of its
object, and attaches more consequence to literary attainments and
pursuits than they really possess. Shakspeare had looked too much abroad
into the world, and his views of things were of too universal and
comprehensive a cast, not to have taught him to estimate the importance
of posthumous fame according to its true value and relative proportions.
Though he might have some conception of his future fame, he could not
but feel the contrast between that and his actual situation; and,
indeed, he complains bitterly of the latter in one of his sonnets.[34]
He would perhaps think, that, to be the idol of posterity, when we are
no more, was hardly a full compensation for being the object of the
glance and scorn of fools while we are living; and that, in truth, this
universal fame so much vaunted, was a vague phantom of blind enthusiasm;
for what is the amount even of Shakspeare’s fame? That, in that very
country which boasts his genius and his birth, perhaps not one person in
ten has ever heard of his name, or read a syllable of his writings!

We will add another observation in connection with this subject, which
is, that men of the greatest genius produce their works with too much
facility (and, as it were, spontaneously) to require the love of fame as
a stimulus to their exertions, or to make them seem deserving of the
admiration of mankind as their reward. It is, indeed, one characteristic
mark of the highest class of excellence to appear to come naturally from
the mind of the author, without consciousness or effort. The work seems
like inspiration—to be the gift of some God or of the Muse. But it is
the sense of difficulty which enhances the admiration of power, both in
ourselves and in others. Hence it is that there is nothing so remote
from vanity as true genius. It is almost as natural for those who are
endowed with the highest powers of the human mind to produce the
miracles of art, as for other men to breathe or move. Correggio, who is
said to have produced some of his divinest works almost without having
seen a picture, probably did not know that he had done anything
extraordinary.

                                                                      Z.


 NO. 8.]             ON HOGARTH’S MARRIAGE A-LA-MODE      [JUNE 5, 1814.

The superiority of the pictures of Hogarth, which we have seen in the
late collection at the British Institution, to the common prints, is
confined chiefly to the _Marriage a-la-Mode_. We shall attempt to
illustrate a few of their most striking excellencies, more particularly
with reference to the expression of character. Their merits are indeed
so prominent, and have been so often discussed, that it may be thought
difficult to point out any new beauties; but they contain so much truth
of nature, they present the objects to the eye under so many aspects and
bearings, admit of so many constructions, and are so pregnant with
meaning, that the subject is in a manner inexhaustible.

Boccacio, the most refined and sentimental of all the novel-writers, has
been stigmatised as a mere inventor of licentious tales, because readers
in general have only seized on those things in his works which were
suited to their own taste, and have reflected their own grossness back
upon the writer. So it has happened that the majority of critics having
been most struck with the strong and decided expression in Hogarth, the
extreme delicacy and subtle gradations of character in his pictures have
almost entirely escaped them. In the first picture of the _Marriage
a-la-Mode_, the three figures of the young Nobleman, his intended Bride,
and her inamorato, the Lawyer, shew how much Hogarth excelled in the
power of giving soft and effeminate expression. They have, however, been
less noticed than the other figures, which tell a plainer story and
convey a more palpable moral. Nothing can be more finely managed than
the differences of character in these delicate personages. The Beau sits
smiling at the looking-glass, with a reflected simper of
self-admiration, and a languishing inclination of the head, while the
rest of his body is perked up on his high heels with a certain air of
tiptoe elevation. He is the Narcissus of the reign of George II., whose
powdered peruke, ruffles, gold lace, and patches, divide his self-love
unequally with his own person,—the true Sir Plume of his day;

                ‘Of amber-lidded snuff-box justly vain,
                And the nice conduct of a clouded cane.’

There is the same felicity in the figure and attitude of the Bride,
courted by the Lawyer. There is the utmost flexibility, and yielding
softness in her whole person, a listless languor and tremulous suspense
in the expression of her face. It is the precise look and air which Pope
has given to his favourite Belinda, just at the moment of the _Rape of
the Lock_. The heightened glow, the forward intelligence, and loosened
soul of love in the same face, in the assignation scene before the
masquerade, form a fine and instructive contrast to the delicacy,
timidity, and coy reluctance expressed in the first. The Lawyer in both
pictures is much the same—perhaps too much so—though even this unmoved,
unaltered appearance may be designed as characteristic. In both cases he
has ‘a person, and a smooth dispose, framed to make woman false.’ He is
full of that easy good-humour and easy good opinion of himself, with
which the sex are delighted. There is not a sharp angle in his face to
obstruct his success, or give a hint of doubt or difficulty. His whole
aspect is round and rosy, lively and unmeaning, happy without the least
expense of thought, careless and inviting; and conveys a perfect idea of
the uninterrupted glide and pleasing murmur of the soft periods that
flow from his tongue.

The expression of the Bride in the Morning Scene is the most highly
seasoned, and at the same time the most vulgar in the series. The
figure, face, and attitude of the Husband are inimitable. Hogarth has
with great skill contrasted the pale countenance of the husband with the
yellow whitish colour of the marble chimney-piece behind him, in such a
manner as to preserve the fleshy tone of the former. The airy splendour
of the view of the inner room in this picture is probably not exceeded
by any of the productions of the Flemish School.

The Young Girl in the third picture, who is represented as the victim of
fashionable profligacy, is unquestionably one of the artist’s
_chef-d’œuvres_. The exquisite delicacy of the painting is only
surpassed by the felicity and subtlety of the conception. Nothing can be
more striking than the contrast between the extreme softness of her
person, and the hardened indifference of her character. The vacant
stillness, the docility to vice, the premature suppression of youthful
sensibility, the doll-like mechanism of the whole figure, which seems to
have no other feeling but a sickly sense of pain,—shew the deepest
insight into human nature, and into the effects of those refinements in
depravity by which it has been good-naturedly asserted, that ‘vice loses
half its evil in losing all its grossness.’ The story of this picture is
in some parts very obscure and enigmatical. It is certain that the
Nobleman is not looking straightforward to the Quack, whom he seems to
have been threatening with his cane, but that his eyes are turned up
with an ironical leer of triumph to the Procuress. The commanding
attitude and size of this woman, the swelling circumference of her
dress, spread out like a turkey-cock’s feathers,—the fierce,
ungovernable, inveterate malignity of her countenance, which hardly
needs the comment of the clasp-knife to explain her purpose, are all
admirable in themselves, and still more so, as they are opposed to the
mute insensibility, the elegant negligence of the dress, and the
childish figure of the girl, who is supposed to be her _protégée_. As
for the Quack, there can be no doubt entertained about him. His face
seems as if it were composed of salve, and his features exhibit all the
chaos and confusion of the most gross, ignorant, and impudent
empiricism.

The gradations of ridiculous affectation in the Music Scene are finely
imagined and preserved. The preposterous, overstrained admiration of the
Lady of Quality, the sentimental, insipid, patient delight of the Man
with his hair in papers and sipping his tea,—the pert, smirking,
conceited, half-distorted approbation of the figure next to him, the
transition to the total insensibility of the round face in profile, and
then to the wonder of the Negro-boy at the rapture of his Mistress, form
a perfect whole. The sanguine complexion and flame-coloured hair of the
female Virtuoso throw an additional light on the character. This is lost
in the print. The continuing the red colour of the hair into the back of
the chair has been pointed out as one of those instances of alliteration
in colouring, of which these pictures are everywhere full. The gross
bloated appearance of the Italian Singer is well relieved by the hard
features of the instrumental performer behind him, which might be carved
of wood. The Negro-boy, holding the chocolate, both in expression,
colour, and execution, is a master-piece. The gay, lively derision of
the other Negro boy, playing with the Actæon, is an ingenious contrast
to the profound amazement of the first. Some account has already been
given of the two lovers in this picture. It is curious to observe the
infinite activity of mind which the artist displays on every occasion.
An instance occurs in the present picture. He has so contrived the
papers in the hair of the Bride, as to make them look almost like a
wreath of half-blown flowers, while those which he has placed on the
head of the musical Amateur very much resemble a _cheveux-de-frise_ of
horns, which adorn and fortify the lack-lustre expression and mild
resignation of the face beneath.

The Night Scene is inferior to the rest of the series. The attitude of
the Husband, who is just killed, is one in which it would be impossible
for him to stand or even to fall. It resembles the loose pasteboard
figures they make for children. The characters in the last picture, in
which the Wife dies, are all masterly. We would particularly refer to
the captious, petulant self-sufficiency of the Apothecary, whose face
and figure are constructed on exact physiognomical principles, and to
the fine example of passive obedience and non-resistance in the Servant,
whom he is taking to task, and whose coat of green and yellow livery is
as long and melancholy as his face. The disconsolate look, the haggard
eyes, the open mouth, the comb sticking in the hair, the broken, gapped
teeth, which, as it were, hitch in an answer—every thing about him
denotes the utmost perplexity and dismay. The harmony and gradations of
colour in this picture are uniformly preserved with the greatest nicety,
and are well worthy the attention of the artist.


 NO. 9.]                  THE SUBJECT CONTINUED          [JUNE 19, 1814.

It has been observed, that Hogarth’s pictures are exceedingly unlike any
other representations of the same kind of subjects—that they form a
class, and have a character, peculiar to themselves. It may be worth
while to consider in what this general distinction consists.

In the first place, they are, in the strictest sense, _Historical_
pictures; and if what Fielding says be true, that his novel of _Tom
Jones_ ought to be regarded as an epic prose-poem, because it contained
a regular developement of fable, manners, character, and passion, the
compositions of Hogarth will, in like manner, be found to have a higher
claim to the title of Epic Pictures than many which have of late
arrogated that denomination to themselves. When we say that Hogarth
treated his subjects historically, we mean that his works represent the
manners and humours of mankind in action, and their characters by varied
expression. Every thing in his pictures has life and motion in it. Not
only does the business of the scene never stand still, but every feature
and muscle is put into full play; the exact feeling of the moment is
brought out, and carried to its utmost height, and then instantly seized
and stamped on the canvass for ever. The expression is always taken _en
passant_, in a state of progress or change, and, as it were, at the
salient point. Besides the excellence of each individual face, the
reflection of the expression from face to face, the contrast and
struggle of particular motives and feelings in the different actors in
the scene, as of anger, contempt, laughter, compassion, are conveyed in
the happiest and most lively manner. His figures are not like the
back-ground on which they are painted: even the pictures on the wall
have a peculiar look of their own. Again, with the rapidity, variety,
and scope of history, Hogarth’s heads have all the reality and
correctness of portraits. He gives the extremes of character and
expression, but he gives them with perfect truth and accuracy. This is,
in fact, what distinguishes his compositions from all others of the same
kind, that they are equally remote from caricature, and from mere still
life. It of course happens in subjects from common life, that the
painter can procure real models, and he can get them to sit as long as
he pleases. Hence, in general, those attitudes and expressions have been
chosen which could be assumed the longest; and in imitating which, the
artist, by taking pains and time, might produce almost as complete
fac-similes as he could of a flower or a flower-pot, of a damask
curtain, or a china vase. The copy was as perfect and as uninteresting
in the one case as in the other. On the contrary, subjects of drollery
and ridicule affording frequent examples of strange deformity and
peculiarity of features, these have been eagerly seized by another class
of artists, who, without subjecting themselves to the laborious drudgery
of the Dutch School and their imitators, have produced our popular
caricatures, by rudely copying or exaggerating the casual irregularities
of the human countenance. Hogarth has equally avoided the faults of both
these styles, the insipid tameness of the one, and the gross vulgarity
of the other, so as to give to the productions of his pencil equal
solidity and effect. For his faces go to the very verge of caricature,
and yet never (we believe in any single instance) go beyond it: they
take the very widest latitude, and yet we always see the links which
bind them to nature: they bear all the marks and carry all the
conviction of reality with them, as if we had seen the actual faces for
the first time, from the precision, consistency, and good sense, with
which the whole and every part is made out. They exhibit the most
uncommon features with the most uncommon expressions, but which are yet
as familiar and intelligible as possible, because with all the boldness
they have all the truth of nature. Hogarth has left behind him as many
of these memorable faces, in their memorable moments, as perhaps most of
us remember in the course of our lives, and has thus doubled the
quantity of our observation.

We have, in a former paper, attempted to point out the fund of
observation, physical and moral, contained in one set of these pictures,
the _Marriage a-la-Mode_. The rest would furnish as many topics to
descant upon, were the patience of the reader as inexhaustible as the
painter’s invention. But as this is not the case, we shall content
ourselves with barely referring to some of those figures in the other
pictures, which appear the most striking, and which we see not only
while we are looking at them, but which we have before us at all other
times. For instance, who having seen can easily forget that exquisite
frost-piece of religion and morality, the antiquated Prude in the
Morning Scene; or that striking commentary on the _good old times_, the
little wretched appendage of a Foot-boy, who crawls half famished and
half frozen behind her? The French Man and Woman in the Noon are the
perfection of flighty affectation and studied grimace; the amiable
_fraternisation_ of the two old Women saluting each other is not enough
to be admired; and in the little Master, in the same national group, we
see the early promise and personification of that eternal principle of
wondrous self-complacency, proof against all circumstances, and which
makes the French the only people who are vain even of being cuckolded
and being conquered! Or shall we prefer to this the outrageous distress
and unmitigated terrors of the Boy, who has dropped his dish of meat,
and who seems red all over with shame and vexation, and bursting with
the noise he makes? Or what can be better than the good housewifery of
the Girl underneath, who is devouring the lucky fragments, or than the
plump, ripe, florid, luscious look of the Servant-wench, embraced by a
greasy rascal of an Othello, with her pye-dish tottering like her
virtue, and with the most precious part of its contents running over?
Just—no, not quite—as good is the joke of the Woman over-head, who,
having quarrelled with her husband, is throwing their Sunday’s dinner
out of the window, to complete this chapter of accidents of
baked-dishes. The Husband in the Evening Scene is certainly as meek as
any recorded in history; but we cannot say that we admire this picture,
or the Night Scene after it. But then, in the Taste in High Life, there
is that inimitable pair, differing only in sex, congratulating and
delighting one another by ‘all the mutually reflected charities’ of
folly and affectation, with the young Lady coloured like a rose,
dandling her little, black, pug-faced, white-teethed, chuckling
favourite, and with the portrait of Mons. Des Noyers in the back-ground,
dancing in a grand ballet, surrounded by butterflies. And again, in the
Election Dinner, is the immortal Cobler, surrounded by his Peers, who,
‘frequent and full,’—

            ‘In _loud_ recess and _brawling_ conclave sit’:—

the Jew in the second picture, a very Jew in grain—innumerable fine
sketches of heads in the Polling for Votes, of which the Nobleman
overlooking the caricaturist is the best; and then the irresistible
tumultuous display of broad humour in the Chairing the Member, which is,
perhaps, of all Hogarth’s pictures, the most full of laughable incidents
and situations—the yellow, rusty-faced thresher, with his swinging
flail, breaking the head of one of the Chairmen, and his redoubted
antagonist, the Sailor, with his oak-stick, and stumping wooden leg, a
supplemental cudgel—the persevering ecstasy of the hobbling Blind
Fiddler, who, in the fray, appears to have been trod upon by the
artificial excrescence of the honest Tar—Monsieur, the Monkey, with
piteous aspect, speculating the impending disaster of the triumphant
candidate, and his brother Bruin, appropriating the paunch—the
precipitous flight of the Pigs, souse over head into the water, the fine
Lady fainting, with vermilion lips, and the two Chimney-sweepers,
satirical young rogues! We had almost forgot the Politician who is
burning a hole through his hat with a candle in reading the newspaper;
and the Chickens, in the _March to Finchley_, wandering in search of
their lost dam, who is found in the pocket of the Serjeant. Of the
pictures in the _Rake’s Progress_ in this collection, we shall not here
say any thing, because we think them, on the whole, inferior to the
prints, and because they have already been criticised by a writer, to
whom we could add nothing, in a paper which ought to be read by every
lover of Hogarth and of English genius.[35]

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 10.]                  ON MILTON’S LYCIDAS            [AUG. 6, 1815.

            ‘At last he rose, and twitch’d his mantle blue:
            To-morrow to fresh woods, and pastures new.’

Of all Milton’s smaller poems, _Lycidas_ is the greatest favourite with
us. We cannot agree to the charge which Dr. Johnson has brought against
it, of pedantry and want of feeling. It is the fine emanation of
classical sentiment in a youthful scholar—‘most musical, most
melancholy.’ A certain tender gloom overspreads it, a wayward
abstraction, a forgetfulness of his subject in the serious reflections
that arise out of it. The gusts of passion come and go like the sounds
of music borne on the wind. The loss of the friend whose death he
laments seems to have recalled, with double force, the reality of those
speculations which they had indulged together; we are transported to
classic ground, and a mysterious strain steals responsive on the ear
while we listen to the poet,

              ‘With eager thought warbling his Doric lay.’

We shall proceed to give a few passages at length in support of our
opinion. The first we shall quote is as remarkable for the truth and
sweetness of the natural descriptions as for the characteristic elegance
of the allusions:

        ‘Together both, ere the high lawns appear’d
        Under the opening eye-lids of the morn,
        We drove a-field; and both together heard
        What time the gray-fly winds her sultry horn,
        Battening our flocks with the fresh dews of night,
        Oft till the star that rose at evening bright
        Towards Heaven’s descent had sloped his westering wheel.
        Meanwhile the rural ditties were not mute,
        Temper’d to the oaten flute:
        Rough satyrs danced, and fauns with cloven heel
        From the glad sound would not be absent long,
        And old Dametas loved to hear our song.
        But oh the heavy change, now thou art gone,
        Now thou art gone, and never must return!
        Thee, shepherd, thee the woods and desert caves
        With wild thyme and the gadding vine o’ergrown,
        And all their echoes mourn.
        The willows and the hazel copses green
        Shall now no more be seen
        Fanning their joyous leaves to thy soft lays.
        As killing as the canker to the rose,
        Or taint-worm to the weanling herds that graze,
        Or frost to flowers that their gay wardrobe wear,
        When first the white-thorn blows;
        Such, Lycidas, thy loss to shepherd’s ear!’

After the fine apostrophe on Fame which Phœbus is invoked to utter, the
poet proceeds:

           ‘Oh fountain Arethuse, and thou honour’d flood,
           Smooth-sliding Mincius, crown’d with vocal reeds,
           That strain I heard was of a higher mood;
           But now my oat proceeds,
           And listens to the herald of the sea
           That came in Neptune’s plea.
           He ask’d the waves, and ask’d the felon winds,
           What hard mishap hath doom’d this gentle swain?
           And question’d every gust of rugged winds
           That blows from off each beaked promontory.
           They knew not of his story:
           And sage Hippotades their answer brings,
           That not a blast was from his dungeon stray’d,
           The air was calm, and on the level brine
           Sleek Panope with all her sisters play’d.’

If this is art, it is perfect art; nor do we wish for anything better.
The measure of the verse, the very sound of the names, would almost
produce the effect here described. To ask the poet not to make use of
such allusions as these, is to ask the painter not to dip in the colours
of the rainbow, if he could. In fact, it is the common cant of criticism
to consider every allusion to the classics, and particularly in a mind
like Milton’s, as pedantry and affectation. Habit is a second nature;
and, in this sense, the pedantry (if it is to be called so) of the
scholastic enthusiast, who is constantly referring to images of which
his mind is full, is as graceful as it is natural. It is not affectation
in him to recur to ideas and modes of expression, with which he has the
strongest associations, and in which he takes the greatest delight.
Milton was as conversant with the world of genius before him as with the
world of nature about him; the fables of the ancient mythology were as
familiar to him as his dreams. To be a pedant, is to see neither the
beauties of nature nor of art. Milton saw both; and he made use of the
one only to adorn and give new interest to the other. He was a
passionate admirer of nature; and, in a single couplet of his,
describing the moon,—

               ‘Like one that had been led astray
               Through the heaven’s wide pathless way,’—

there is more intense observation, and intense feeling of nature (as if
he had gazed himself blind in looking at her), than in twenty volumes of
descriptive poetry. But he added to his own observation of nature the
splendid fictions of ancient genius, enshrined her in the mysteries of
ancient religion, and celebrated her with the pomp of ancient names.

            ‘Next Camus, reverend sire, went footing slow,
            His mantle hairy and his bonnet sedge,
            Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge
            Like to that sanguine flower inscrib’d with woe.
            Oh! who hath reft (quoth he) my dearest pledge?
            Last came, and last did go,
            The pilot of the Galilean lake.’

There is a wonderful correspondence in the rhythm of these lines to the
idea which they convey. This passage, which alludes to the clerical
character of _Lycidas_, has been found fault with, as combining the
truths of the Christian religion with the fictions of the heathen
mythology. We conceive there is very little foundation for this
objection, either in reason or good taste. We will not go so far as to
defend Camoens, who, in his _Lusiad_, makes Jupiter send Mercury with a
dream to propagate the Catholic religion; nor do we know that it is
generally proper to introduce the two things in the same poem, though we
see no objection to it here; but of this we are quite sure, that there
is no inconsistency or natural repugnance between this poetical and
religious faith in the same mind. To the understanding, the belief of
the one is incompatible with that of the other; but in the imagination,
they not only may, but do constantly co-exist. We will venture to go
farther, and maintain, that every classical scholar, however orthodox a
Christian he may be, is an honest Heathen at heart. This requires
explanation. Whoever, then, attaches a reality to any idea beyond the
mere name, has, to a certain extent, (though not an abstract), an
habitual and practical belief in it. Now, to any one familiar with the
names of the personages of the Heathen mythology, they convey a positive
identity beyond the mere name. We refer them to something out of
ourselves. It is only by an effort of abstraction that we divest
ourselves of the idea of their reality; all our involuntary prejudices
are on their side. This is enough for the poet. They impose on the
imagination by all the attractions of beauty and grandeur. They come
down to us in sculpture and in song. We have the same associations with
them, as if they had really been; for the belief of the fiction in
ancient times has produced all the same effects as the reality could
have done. It was a reality to the minds of the ancient Greeks and
Romans, and through them it is reflected to us. And, as we shape towers,
and men, and armed steeds, out of the broken clouds that glitter in the
distant horizon, so, throned above the ruins of the ancient world,
Jupiter still nods sublime on the top of blue Olympus, Hercules leans
upon his club, Apollo has not laid aside his bow, nor Neptune his
trident; the sea-gods ride upon the sounding waves, the long procession
of heroes and demi-gods passes in endless review before us, and still we
hear

                      ——‘The Muses in a ring
              Aye round about Jove’s altar sing:

                     .       .       .       .       .

              Have sight of Proteus coming from the sea,
              And hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn.’

If all these mighty fictions had really existed, they could have done no
more for us! We shall only give one other passage from _Lycidas_; but we
flatter ourselves that it will be a treat to our readers, if they are
not already familiar with it. It is the passage which contains that
exquisite description of the flowers:

            ‘Return, Alpheus; the dread voice is past
            That shrunk thy streams; return, Sicilian Muse,
            And call the vales, and bid them hither cast
            Their bells, and flow’rets of a thousand hues.
            Ye valleys low, where the mild whispers use
            Of shades and wanton winds and gushing brooks,
            On whose fresh lap the swart star sparely looks,
            Throw hither all your quaint enamell’d eyes,
            That on the green turf suck the honied showers,
            And purple all the ground with vernal flowers;
            Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies,
            The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine,
            The white pink, and the pansy freak’d with jet,
            The glowing violet,
            The musk-rose, and the well-attired woodbine,
            With cowslips wan, that hang the pensive head,
            And every flower that sad embroidery wears;
            Bid amaranthus all his beauty shed,
            And daffadillies fill their cups with tears,
            To strew the laureat hearse where Lycid lies.
            For so to interpose a little ease
            Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise.
            Ay me! Whilst thee the shores and sounding seas
            Waft far away, where’er thy bones are hurl’d,
            Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides,
            Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide
            Visit’st the bottom of the monstrous world,
            Or whether thou, to our moist vows denied,
            Sleep’st by the fable of Bellerus old,
            Where the great vision of the guarded mount
            Looks towards Namancos and Bayona’s hold,
            Look homeward, Angel, now, and melt with ruth,
            And, O ye Dolphins, waft the hapless youth.’

Dr. Johnson is very much offended at the introduction of these Dolphins;
and indeed, if he had had to guide them through the waves, he would have
made much the same figure as his old friend Dr. Burney does, swimming in
the _Thames_ with his wig on, with the water-nymphs, in the picture by
Barry at the Adelphi.

There is a description of flowers in the _Winter’s Tale_, which we shall
give as a parallel to Milton’s. We shall leave it to the reader to
decide which is the finest; for we dare not give the preference.
_Perdita_ says,

                    ——‘Here’s flowers for you,
      Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram,
      The marygold, that goes to bed with the sun,
      And with him rises weeping; these are flowers
      Of middle summer, and I think, they’re given
      To men of middle age. Y’are welcome.

      ‘_Camillo._ I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
      And only live by gazing.

      ‘_Perdita._              Out, alas!
      You’d be so lean, that blasts of January
      Would blow you through and through. Now, my fairest friend,
      I would I had some flowers o’ th’ spring, that might
      Become your time of day: O Proserpina,
      For the flowers now, that, frighted, you let fall
      From Dis’s waggon! Daffodils,
      That come before the swallow dares, and take
      The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
      But sweeter than the lids of Juno’s eyes,
      Or Cytherea’s breath; pale primroses,
      That die unmarried, ere they can behold
      Bright Phœbus in his strength, a malady
      Most incident to maids; bold oxlips, and
      The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,
      The flower de lis being one. O, these I lack
      To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
      To strew him o’er and o’er.’

Dr. Johnson’s general remark, that Milton’s genius had not room to show
itself in his smaller pieces, is not well-founded. Not to mention
_Lycidas_, the _Allegro_, and _Penseroso_, it proceeds on a false
estimate of the merits of his great work, which is not more
distinguished by strength and sublimity than by tenderness and beauty.
The last were as essential qualities of Milton’s mind as the first. The
battle of the angels, which has been commonly considered as the best
part of the _Paradise Lost_, is the worst.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 11.]               ON MILTON’S VERSIFICATION        [AUG. 20, 1815.

Milton’s works are a perpetual invocation to the Muses; a hymn to Fame.
His religious zeal infused its character into his imagination; and he
devotes himself with the same sense of duty to the cultivation of his
genius, as he did to the exercise of virtue, or the good of his country.
He does not write from casual impulse, but after a severe examination of
his own strength, and with a determination to leave nothing undone which
it is in his power to do. He always labours, and he almost always
succeeds. He strives to say the finest things in the world, and he does
say them. He adorns and dignifies his subject to the utmost. He
surrounds it with all the possible associations of beauty or grandeur,
whether moral, or physical, or intellectual. He refines on his
descriptions of beauty, till the sense almost aches at them, and raises
his images of terror to a gigantic elevation, that ‘makes Ossa like a
wart.’ He has a high standard, with which he is constantly comparing
himself, and nothing short of which can satisfy him:

                         ——‘Sad task, yet argument
               Not less but more heroic than the wrath
               Of stern Achilles on his foe pursued,
               If answerable stile I can obtain.
               ——Unless an age too late, or cold
               Climate, or years, damp my intended wing.’

Milton has borrowed more than any other writer; yet he is perfectly
distinct from every other writer. The power of his mind is stamped on
every line. He is a writer of centos, and yet in originality only
inferior to Homer. The quantity of art shews the strength of his genius;
so much art would have overloaded any other writer. Milton’s learning
has all the effect of intuition. He describes objects of which he had
only read in books, with the vividness of actual observation. His
imagination has the force of nature. He makes words tell as pictures:

              ‘Him followed Rimmon, whose delightful seat
              Was fair Damascus, on the fertile banks
              Of Abbana and Pharphar, _lucid_ streams.’

And again:

       ‘As when a vulture on Imaus bred,
       Whose snowy ridge the roving Tartar bounds,
       Dislodging from a region scarce of prey
       To gorge the flesh of lambs or yearling kids
       On hills where flocks are fed, _flies towards the springs
       Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams;
       But in his way lights on the barren plains
       Of Sericana, where Chineses drive
       With sails and wind their cany waggons light_.’

Such passages may be considered as demonstrations of history. Instances
might be multiplied without end. There is also a decided tone in his
descriptions, an eloquent dogmatism, as if the poet spoke from thorough
conviction, which Milton probably derived from his spirit of
partisanship, or else his spirit of partisanship from the natural
firmness and vehemence of his mind. In this Milton resembles Dante, (the
only one of the moderns with whom he has anything in common), and it is
remarkable that Dante, as well as Milton, was a political partisan. That
approximation to the severity of impassioned prose which has been made
an objection to Milton’s poetry, is one of its chief excellencies. It
has been suggested, that the vividness with which he describes visible
objects, might be owing to their having acquired a greater strength in
his mind after the privation of sight; but we find the same palpableness
and solidity in the descriptions which occur in his early poems. There
is, indeed, the same depth of impression in his descriptions of the
objects of the other senses. Milton had as much of what is meant by
_gusto_ as any poet. He forms the most intense conceptions of things,
and then embodies them by a single stroke of his pen. Force of style is
perhaps his first excellence. Hence he stimulates us most in the
reading, and less afterwards.

It has been said that Milton’s ideas were musical rather than
picturesque, but this observation is not true, in the sense in which it
was meant. The ear, indeed, predominates over the eye, because it is
more immediately affected, and because the language of music blends more
immediately with, and forms a more natural accompaniment to, the
variable and indefinite associations of ideas conveyed by words. But
where the associations of the imagination are not the principal thing,
the individual object is given by Milton with equal force and beauty.
The strongest and best proof of this, as a characteristic power of his
mind, is, that the persons of Adam and Eve, of Satan, etc., are always
accompanied, in our imagination, with the grandeur of the naked figure;
they convey to us the ideas of sculpture. As an instance, take the
following:

                                    ——‘He soon
            Saw within ken a glorious Angel stand,
            The same whom John saw also in the sun:
            His back was turned, but not his brightness hid;
            Of beaming sunny rays a golden tiar
            Circled his head, nor less his locks behind
            Illustrious on his shoulders fledged with wings
            Lay waving round; on some great charge employ’d
            He seem’d, or fix’d in cogitation deep.
            Glad was the spirit impure, as now in hope
            To find who might direct his wand’ring flight
            To Paradise, the happy seat of man,
            His journey’s end, and our beginning woe.
            But first he casts to change his proper shape,
            Which else might work him danger or delay:
            And now a stripling cherub he appears,
            Not of the prime, yet such as in his face
            Youth smiled celestial, and to every limb
            Suitable grace diffus’d, so well he feign’d:
            Under a coronet his flowing hair
            In curls on either cheek play’d; wings he wore
            Of many a colour’d plume sprinkled with gold,
            His habit fit for speed succinct, and held
            Before his decent steps a silver wand.’

The figures introduced here have all the elegance and precision of a
Greek statue.

Milton’s blank verse is the only blank verse in the language (except
Shakspeare’s) which is readable. Dr. Johnson, who had modelled his ideas
of versification on the regular sing-song of Pope, condemns the
_Paradise Lost_ as harsh and unequal. We shall not pretend to say that
this is not sometimes the case; for where a degree of excellence beyond
the mechanical rules of art is attempted the poet must sometimes fail.
But we imagine that there are more perfect examples in Milton of musical
expression, or of an adaptation of the sound and movement of the verse
to the meaning of the passage, than in all our other writers, whether of
rhyme or blank verse, put together, (with the exception already
mentioned). Spenser is the most harmonious of our poets, and Dryden is
the most sounding and varied of our rhymists. But in neither is there
anything like the same ear for music, the same power of approximating
the varieties of poetical to those of musical rhythm, as there is in our
great epic poet. The sound of his lines is moulded into the expression
of the sentiment, almost of the very image. They rise or fall, pause or
hurry rapidly on, with exquisite art, but without the least trick or
affectation, as the occasion seems to require.

The following are some of the finest instances:

                         ——‘His hand was known
         In Heaven by many a tower’d structure high;
         Nor was his name unheard or unador’d
         In ancient Greece: and in the Ausonian land
         Men called him Mulciber: and how he fell
         From Heav’n, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
         Sheer o’er the crystal battlements; from morn
         To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
         A summer’s day; and with the setting sun
         Dropt from the zenith like a falling star
         On Lemnos, the Ægean isle: this they relate,
         Erring.’

                 ——‘But chief the spacious hall
         Thick swarm’d, both on the ground and in the air,
         Brush’d with the hiss of rustling wings. As bees
         In spring time, when the sun with Taurus rides,
         Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
         In clusters; they among fresh dews and flow’rs
         Fly to and fro: or on the smoothed plank,
         The suburb of their straw-built citadel,
         New rubb’d with balm, expatiate and confer
         Their state affairs. So thick the airy crowd
         Swarm’d and were straiten’d; till the signal giv’n,
         Behold a wonder! They but now who seem’d
         In bigness to surpass earth’s giant sons,
         Now less than smallest dwarfs, in narrow room
         Throng numberless, like that Pygmean race
         Beyond the Indian mount, or fairy elves,
         Whose midnight revels by a forest side
         Or fountain, some belated peasant sees,
         Or dreams he sees, while over-head the moon
         Sits arbitress, and nearer to the earth
         Wheels her pale course: they on their mirth and dance
         Intent, with jocund music charm his ear;
         At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.’

We can only give another instance; though we have some difficulty in
leaving off. ‘What a pity,’ said an ingenious person of our
acquaintance, ‘that Milton had not the pleasure of reading _Paradise
Lost_!’—

           ‘Round he surveys (and well might, where he stood
           So high above the circling canopy
           Of night’s extended shade) from eastern point
           Of Libra to the fleecy star that bears
           Andromeda far off Atlantic seas
           Beyond th’ horizon: then from pole to pole
           He views in breadth, and without longer pause
           Down right into the world’s first region throws
           His flight precipitant, and winds with ease
           Through the pure marble air his oblique way
           Amongst innumerable stars that shone
           Stars distant, but nigh hand seem’d other worlds;
           Or other worlds they seem’d or happy isles,’ etc.

The verse, in this exquisitely modulated passage, floats up and down as
if it had itself wings. Milton has himself given us the theory of his
versification.

                  ‘In many a winding bout
                  Of linked sweetness long drawn out.’

Dr. Johnson and Pope would have converted his vaulting Pegasus into a
rocking-horse. Read any other blank verse but Milton’s,—Thomson’s,
Young’s, Cowper’s, Wordsworth’s,—and it will be found, from the want of
the same insight into ‘the hidden soul of harmony,’ to be mere lumbering
prose.

                                                                   W. H.

                 _To the President of The Round Table._

  SIR,—It is somewhat remarkable, that in _Pope’s Essay on Criticism_
  (not a very long poem) there are no less than half a score couplets
  rhyming to the word _sense_.

     ‘But of the two, less dangerous is the offence,
     To tire our patience than mislead our sense.’—_lines_ 3, 4.

     ‘In search of wit these lose their common sense,
     And then turn critics in their own defence.’—_l._ 28, 29.

     ‘Pride, where wit fails, steps in to our defence,
     And fills up all the mighty void of sense.’—_l._ 209, 10.

     ‘Some by old words to fame have made pretence,
     Ancients in phrase, mere moderns in their sense.’—_l._ 324, 5.

     ‘’Tis not enough no harshness gives offence;
     The sound must seem an echo to the sense.’—_l._ 364, 5.

     ‘At every trifle scorn to take offence;
     That always shews great pride or little sense.’—_l._ 386, 7.

     ‘Be silent always, when you doubt your sense,
     And speak, though sure, with seeming diffidence.’—_l._ 566, 7.

     ‘Be niggards of advice on no pretence,
     For the worst avarice is that of sense.’—_l._ 578, 9.

     ‘Strain out the last dull dropping of their sense,
     And rhyme with all the rage of impotence.’—_l._ 608, 9.

     ‘Horace still charms with graceful negligence,
     And without method talks us into sense.’—_l._ 653, 4.

                             I am, Sir, your humble servant,

                                                       A SMALL CRITIC.


 NO. 12.]                       ON MANNER                [AUG. 27, 1815.
                                                          [SEP. 3, 1815.

It was the opinion of Lord Chesterfield, that _manner_ is of more
importance than _matter_. This opinion seems at least to be warranted by
the practice of the world; nor do we think it so entirely without
foundation as some persons of more solid than showy pretensions would
make us believe. In the remarks which we are going to make, we can
scarcely hope to have any party very warmly on our side; for the most
superficial coxcomb would be thought to owe his success to sterling
merit.

What any person says or does is one thing; the mode in which he says or
does it is another. The last of these is what we understand by _manner_.
In other words, manner is the involuntary or incidental expression given
to our thoughts and sentiments by looks, tones, and gestures. Now, we
are inclined in many cases to prefer this latter mode of judging of what
passes in the mind to more positive and formal proof, were it for no
other reason than that it is involuntary. ‘Look,’ says Lord
Chesterfield, ‘in the face of the person to whom you are speaking, if
you wish to know his real sentiments; for he can command his words more
easily than his countenance.’ We may perform certain actions from
design, or repeat certain professions by rote: the manner of doing
either will in general be the best test of our sincerity. The mode of
conferring a favour is often thought of more value than the favour
itself. The actual obligation may spring from a variety of questionable
motives, vanity, affectation, or interest: the cordiality with which the
person from whom you have received it asks you how you do, or shakes you
by the hand, does not admit of misinterpretation. The manner of doing
any thing, is that which marks the degree and force of our internal
impressions; it emanates most directly from our immediate or habitual
feelings; it is that which stamps its life and character on any action;
the rest may be performed by an automaton. What is it that makes the
difference between the best and the worst actor, but the manner of going
through the same part? The one has a perfect idea of the degree and
force with which certain feelings operate in nature, and the other has
no idea at all of the workings of passion. There would be no difference
between the worst actor in the world and the best, placed in real
circumstances, and under the influence of real passion. A writer may
express the thoughts he has borrowed from another, but not with the same
force, unless he enters into the true spirit of them. Otherwise he will
resemble a person reading what he does not understand, whom you
immediately detect by his wrong emphasis. His illustrations will be
literally exact, but misplaced and awkward; he will not gradually warm
with his subject, nor feel the force of what he says, nor produce the
same effect on his readers. An author’s style is not less a criterion of
his understanding than his sentiments. The same story told by two
different persons shall, from the difference of the manner, either set
the table in a roar, or not relax a feature in the whole company. We
sometimes complain (perhaps rather unfairly) that particular persons
possess more vivacity than wit. But we ought to take into the account,
that their very vivacity arises from their enjoying the joke; and their
humouring a story by drollery of gesture or archness of look, shews only
that they are acquainted with the different ways in which the sense of
the ludicrous expresses itself. It is not the mere dry jest, but the
relish which the person himself has of it, with which we sympathise. For
in all that tends to pleasure and excitement, the capacity for enjoyment
is the principal point. One of the most pleasant and least tiresome
persons of our acquaintance is a humourist, who has three or four quaint
witticisms and proverbial phrases, which he always repeats over and
over; but he does this with just the same vivacity and freshness as
ever, so that you feel the same amusement with less effort than if he
had startled his hearers with a succession of original conceits. Another
friend of ours, who never fails to give vent to one or two real
_jeu-d’esprits_ every time you meet him, from the pain with which he is
delivered of them, and the uneasiness he seems to suffer all the rest of
the time, makes a much more interesting than comfortable companion. If
you see a person in pain for himself, it naturally puts you in pain for
him. The art of pleasing consists in being pleased. To be amiable is to
be satisfied with one’s self and others. Good-humour is essential to
pleasantry. It is this circumstance, among others, that renders the wit
of Rabelais so much more delightful than that of Swift, who, with all
his satire, is ‘as dry as the remainder biscuit after a voyage.’ In
society, good-temper and animal spirits are nearly everything. They are
of more importance than sallies of wit, or refinements of understanding.
They give a general tone of cheerfulness and satisfaction to the
company. The French have the advantage over us in external manners. They
breathe a lighter air, and have a brisker circulation of the blood. They
receive and communicate their impressions more freely. The interchange
of ideas costs them less. Their constitutional gaiety is a kind of
natural intoxication, which does not require any other stimulus. The
English are not so well off in this respect; and _Falstaff’s_
commendation on sack was evidently intended for his countrymen,—whose
‘learning is often a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil, till wine
commences it, and sets it in act and use.’[36] More undertakings fail
for want of spirit than for want of sense. Confidence gives a fool the
advantage over a wise man. In general, a strong passion for any object
will ensure success, for the desire of the end will point out the means.
We apprehend that people usually complain, without reason, of not
succeeding in various pursuits according to their deserts. Such persons,
we will grant, may have great merit in all other respects; but in that
in which they fail, it will almost invariably hold true, that they do
not deserve to succeed. For instance, a person who has spent his life in
thinking will acquire a habit of reflection; but he will neither become
a dancer nor a singer, rich nor beautiful. In like manner, if any one
complains of not succeeding in affairs of gallantry, we will venture to
say, it is because he is not gallant. He has mistaken his talent—that’s
all. If any person of exquisite sensibility makes love awkwardly, it is
because he does not feel it as he should. One of these disappointed
sentimentalists may very probably feel it upon reflection, may brood
over it till he has worked himself up to a pitch of frenzy, and write
his mistress the finest love-letters in the world, in her absence; but,
be assured, he does not feel an atom of this passion in her presence.
If, in paying her a compliment, he frowns with more than usual severity,
or, in presenting her with a bunch of flowers, seems as if he was going
to turn his back upon her, he can only expect to be laughed at for his
pains; nor can he plead an excess of feeling as an excuse for want of
common sense. She may say, ‘It is not with me you are in love, but with
the ridiculous chimeras of your own brain. You are thinking of _Sophia
Western_, or some other heroine, and not of me. Go and make love to your
romances.’

Lord Chesterfield’s character of the Duke of Marlborough is a good
illustration of his general theory. He says, ‘Of all the men I ever knew
in my life, (and I knew him extremely well), the late Duke of
Marlborough possessed the graces in the highest degree, not to say
engrossed them; for I will venture (contrary to the custom of profound
historians, who always assign deep causes for great events) to ascribe
the better half of the Duke of Marlborough’s greatness and riches to
those graces. He was eminently illiterate; wrote bad English, and spelt
it worse. He had no share of what is commonly called parts; that is, no
brightness, nothing shining in his genius. He had most undoubtedly an
excellent good plain understanding with sound judgment. But these alone
would probably have raised him but something higher than they found him,
which was page to King James II.‘s Queen. There the Graces protected and
promoted him; for while he was Ensign of the Guards, the Duchess of
Cleveland, then favourite mistress of Charles II., struck by these very
graces, gave him £5000, with which he immediately bought an annuity of
£500 a year, which was the foundation of his subsequent fortune. His
figure was beautiful, but his manner was irresistible by either man or
woman. It was by this engaging, graceful manner, that he was enabled,
during all his wars, to connect the various and jarring powers of the
grand alliance, and to carry them on to the main object of the war,
notwithstanding their private and separate views, jealousies, and
wrongheadedness. Whatever court he went to (and he was often obliged to
go himself to some resty and refractory ones), he as constantly
prevailed, and brought them into his measures.’[37]

Grace in women has more effect than beauty. We sometimes see a certain
fine self-possession, an habitual voluptuousness of character, which
reposes on its own sensations, and derives pleasure from all around it,
that is more irresistible than any other attraction. There is an air of
languid enjoyment in such persons, ‘in their eyes, in their arms, and
their hands, and their faces,’ which robs us of ourselves, and draws us
by a secret sympathy towards them. Their minds are a shrine where
pleasure reposes. Their smile diffuses a sensation like the breath of
spring. Petrarch’s description of Laura answers exactly to this
character, which is indeed the Italian character. Titian’s portraits are
full of it: they seem sustained by sentiment, or as if the persons whom
he painted sat to music. There is one in the Louvre (or there was) which
had the most of this expression we ever remember. It did not look
downward; ‘it looked forward, beyond this world.’ It was a look that
never passed away, but remained unalterable as the deep sentiment which
gave birth to it. It is the same constitutional character (together with
infinite activity of mind) which has enabled the greatest man in modern
history to bear his reverses of fortune with gay magnanimity, and to
submit to the loss of the empire of the world with as little
discomposure as if he had been playing a game at chess.

Grace has been defined as the outward expression of the inward harmony
of the soul. Foreigners have more of this than the English,—particularly
the people of the southern and eastern countries. Their motions appear
(like the expression of their countenances) to have a more immediate
communication with their feelings. The inhabitants of the northern
climates, compared with these children of the sun, are like hard
inanimate machines, with difficulty set in motion. A strolling gipsy
will offer to tell your fortune with a grace and an insinuation of
address that would be admired in a court.[38] The Hindoos that we see
about the streets are another example of this. They are a different race
of people from ourselves. They wander about in a luxurious dream. They
are like part of a glittering procession,—like revellers in some gay
carnival. Their life is a dance, a measure; they hardly seem to tread
the earth, but are borne along in some more genial element, and bask in
the radiance of brighter suns. We may understand this difference of
climate by recollecting the difference of our own sensations at
different times, in the fine glow of summer, or when we are pinched and
dried up by a northeast wind. Even the foolish Chinese, who go about
twirling their fans and their windmills, shew the same delight in them
as the children they collect around them. The people of the East make it
their business to sit and think and do nothing. They indulge in endless
reverie; for the incapacity of enjoyment does not impose on them the
necessity of action. There is a striking example of this passion for
castle-building in the story of the glass-man in the Arabian Nights.

After all, we would not be understood to say that manner is every thing.
Nor would we put Euclid or Sir Isaac Newton on a level with the first
_petit-maître_ we might happen to meet. We consider _Æsop’s Fables_ to
have been a greater work of genius than Fontaine’s translation of them;
though we doubt whether we should not prefer Fontaine, for his style
only, to Gay, who has shewn a great deal of original invention. The
elegant manners of people of fashion have been objected to us to shew
the frivolity of external accomplishments, and the facility with which
they are acquired. As to the last point, we demur. There is no class of
people who lead so laborious a life, or who take more pains to cultivate
their minds as well as persons, than people of fashion. A young lady of
quality, who has to devote so many hours a day to music, so many to
dancing, so many to drawing, so many to French, Italian, etc., certainly
does not pass her time in idleness; and these accomplishments are
afterwards called into action by every kind of external or mental
stimulus, by the excitements of pleasure, vanity, and interest. A
Ministerial or Opposition lord goes through more drudgery than half a
dozen literary hacks; nor does a reviewer by profession read half the
same number of productions as a modern fine lady is obliged to labour
through. We confess, however, we are not competent judges of the degree
of elegance or refinement implied in the general tone of fashionable
manners. The successful experiment made by _Peregrine Pickle_, in
introducing his strolling mistress into genteel company, does not
redound greatly to their credit. In point of elegance of external
appearance, we see no difference between women of fashion and women of a
different character, who dress in the same style.

                                                                   T. T.


 NO. 13.]               ON THE TENDENCY OF SECTS         [SEP. 10, 1815.

There is a natural tendency in sects to narrow the mind.

The extreme stress laid upon differences of minor importance, to the
neglect of more general truths and broader views of things, gives an
inverted bias to the understanding; and this bias is continually
increased by the eagerness of controversy, and captious hostility to the
prevailing system. A party-feeling of this kind once formed will
insensibly communicate itself to other topics; and will be too apt to
lead its votaries to a contempt for the opinions of others, a jealousy
of every difference of sentiment, and a disposition to arrogate all
sound principle as well as understanding to themselves, and those who
think with them. We can readily conceive how such persons, from fixing
too high a value on the practical pledge which they have given of the
independence and sincerity of their opinions, come at last to entertain
a suspicion of every one else as acting under the shackles of prejudice
or the mask of hypocrisy. All those who have not given in their
unqualified protest against received doctrines and established
authority, are supposed to labour under an acknowledged incapacity to
form a rational determination on any subject whatever. Any argument, not
having the presumption of singularity in its favour, is immediately set
aside as nugatory. There is, however, no prejudice so strong as that
which arises from a fancied exemption from all prejudice. For this last
implies not only the practical conviction that it is right, but the
theoretical assumption that it cannot be wrong. From considering all
objections as in this manner ‘null and void,’ the mind becomes so
thoroughly satisfied with its own conclusions, as to render any further
examination of them superfluous, and confounds its exclusive pretensions
to reason with the absolute possession of it. Those who, from their
professing to submit everything to the test of reason, have acquired the
name of rational Dissenters, have their weak sides as well as other
people: nor do we know of any class of disputants more disposed to take
their opinions for granted, than those who call themselves Freethinkers.
A long habit of objecting to every thing establishes a monopoly in the
right of contradiction; a prescriptive title to the privilege of
starting doubts and difficulties in the common belief, without being
liable to have our own called in question. There cannot be a more
infallible way to prove that we must be in the right, than by
maintaining roundly that every one else is in the wrong! Not only the
opposition of sects to one another, but their unanimity among
themselves, strengthens their confidence in their peculiar notions. They
feel themselves invulnerable behind the double fence of sympathy with
themselves, and antipathy to the rest of the world. Backed by the
zealous support of their followers, they become equally intolerant with
respect to the opinions of others, and tenacious of their own. They
fortify themselves within the narrow circle of their new-fangled
prejudices; the whole exercise of their right of private judgment is
after a time reduced to the repetition of a set of watchwords, which
have been adopted as the Shiboleth of the party; and their extremest
points of faith pass as current as the beadroll and legends of the
Catholics, or St. Athanasius’s Creed, and the Thirty-nine Articles. We
certainly are not going to recommend the establishment of articles of
faith, or implicit assent to them, as favourable to the progress of
philosophy; but neither has the spirit of opposition to them this
tendency, as far as relates to its immediate effects, however useful it
may be in its remote consequences. The spirit of controversy substitutes
the irritation of personal feeling for the independent exertion of the
understanding; and when this irritation ceases, the mind flags for want
of a sufficient stimulus to urge it on. It discharges all its energy
with its spleen. Besides, this perpetual cavilling with the opinions of
others, detecting petty flaws in their arguments, calling them to a
literal account for their absurdities, and squaring their doctrines by a
pragmatical standard of our own, is necessarily adverse to any great
enlargement of mind, or original freedom of thought.[39] The constant
attention bestowed on a few contested points, by at once flattering our
pride, our prejudices, and our indolence, supersedes more general
inquiries; and the bigoted controversialist, by dint of repeating a
certain formula of belief, shall not only convince himself that all
those who differ from him are undoubtedly wrong on that point, but that
their knowledge on all others must be comparatively slight and
superficial. We have known some very worthy and well-informed biblical
critics, who, by virtue of having discovered that one was not three, or
that the same body could not be in two places at once, would be disposed
to treat the whole Council of Trent, with Father Paul at their head,
with very little deference, and to consider Leo X. with all his court,
as no better than drivellers. Such persons will hint to you, as an
additional proof of his genius, that Milton was a non-conformist, and
will excuse the faults of Paradise Lost, as Dr. Johnson magnified them,
because the author was a republican. By the all-sufficiency of their
merits in believing certain truths which have been ‘hid from ages,’ they
are elevated, in their own imagination, to a higher sphere of intellect,
and are released from the necessity of pursuing the more ordinary tracks
of inquiry. Their faculties are imprisoned in a few favourite dogmas,
and they cannot break through the trammels of a sect. Hence we may
remark a hardness and setness in the ideas of those who have been
brought up in this way, an aversion to those finer and more delicate
operations of the intellect, of taste and genius, which require greater
flexibility and variety of thought, and do not afford the same
opportunity for dogmatical assertion and controversial cabal. The
distaste of the Puritans, Quakers, etc. to pictures, music, poetry, and
the fine arts in general, may be traced to this source as much as to
their affected disdain of them, as not sufficiently spiritual and remote
from the gross impurity of sense.[40]

We learn from the interest we take in things, and according to the
number of things in which we take an interest. Our ignorance of the real
value of different objects and pursuits, will in general keep pace with
our contempt for them. To set out with denying common sense to every one
else, is not the way to be wise ourselves; nor shall we be likely to
learn much, if we suppose that no one can teach us any thing worth
knowing. Again, a contempt for the habits and manners of the world is as
prejudicial as a contempt for their opinions. A puritanical abhorrence
of every thing that does not fall in with our immediate prejudices and
customs, must effectually cut us off, not only from a knowledge of the
world and of human nature, but of good and evil, of vice and virtue; at
least, if we can credit the assertion of Plato, (which, to some degree,
we do), that the knowledge of every thing implies the knowledge of its
opposite. ‘There is some soul of goodness in things evil.’ A most
respectable sect among ourselves (we mean the Quakers) have carried this
system of negative qualities nearly to perfection. They labour
diligently, and with great success, to exclude all ideas from their
minds which they might have in common with others. On the principle that
evil communications corrupt good manners, they retain a virgin purity of
understanding, and laudable ignorance of all liberal arts and sciences;
they take every precaution, and keep up a perpetual quarantine against
the infection of other people’s vices—or virtues; they pass through the
world like figures cut out of pasteboard or wood, turning neither to the
right nor the left; and their minds are no more affected by the example
of the follies, the pursuits, the pleasures, or the passions of mankind,
than the clothes which they wear. Their ideas want _airing_; they are
the worse for not being used: for fear of soiling them, they keep them
folded up and laid by in a sort of mental clothes-press, through the
whole of their lives. They take their notions on trust from one
generation to another, (like the scanty cut of their coats), and are so
wrapped up in these traditional maxims, and so pin their faith on them,
that one of the most intelligent of this class of people, not long ago,
assured us that ‘war was a thing that was going quite out of fashion’!
This abstract sort of existence may have its advantages, but it takes
away all the ordinary sources of a moral imagination, as well as
strength of intellect. Interest is the only link that connects them with
the world. We can understand the high enthusiasm and religious devotion
of monks and anchorites, who gave up the world and its pleasures to
dedicate themselves to a sublime contemplation of a future state. But
the sect of the Quakers, who have transplanted the maxims of the desert
into manufacturing towns and populous cities, who have converted the
solitary cells of the religious orders into counting-houses, their beads
into ledgers, and keep a regular debtor and creditor account between
this world and the next, puzzle us mightily! The Dissenter is not vain,
but conceited: that is, he makes up by his own good opinion for the want
of the cordial admiration of others. But this often stands their
self-love in so good stead that they need not envy their dignified
opponents who repose on lawn sleeves and ermine. The unmerited obloquy
and dislike to which they are exposed has made them cold and reserved in
their intercourse with society. The same cause will account for the
dryness and general homeliness of their style. They labour under a sense
of the want of public sympathy. They pursue truth, for its own sake,
into its private recesses and obscure corners. They have to dig their
way along a narrow under-ground passage. It is not their object to
shine; they have none of the usual incentives of vanity, light, airy,
and ostentatious. Archiepiscopal Sees and mitres do not glitter in their
distant horizon. They are not wafted on the wings of fancy, fanned by
the breath of popular applause. The voice of the world, the tide of
opinion, is not with them. They do not therefore aim at _éclat_, at
outward pomp and shew. They have a plain ground to work upon, and they
do not attempt to embellish it with idle ornaments. It would be in vain
to strew the flowers of poetry round the borders of the Unitarian
controversy.

There is one quality common to all sectaries, and that is, a principle
of strong fidelity. They are the safest partisans, and the steadiest
friends. Indeed, they are almost the only people who have any idea of an
abstract attachment either to a cause or to individuals, from a sense of
duty, independently of prosperous or adverse circumstances, and in spite
of opposition.[41]

                                                                      Z.


 NO. 14.]                    ON JOHN BUNCLE             [SEPT. 17, 1815.

_John Buncle_ is the English _Rabelais_. This is an author with whom,
perhaps, many of our readers are not acquainted, and whom we therefore
wish to introduce to their notice. As most of our countrymen delight in
English Generals and in English Admirals, in English Courtiers and in
English Kings, so our great delight is in English authors.

The soul of Francis Rabelais passed into John Amory, the author of _The
Life and Adventures of John Buncle_. Both were physicians, and enemies
of too much gravity. Their great business was to enjoy life. Rabelais
indulges his spirit of sensuality in wine, in dried neats’ tongues, in
Bologna sausages, in botargos. John Buncle shews the same symptoms of
inordinate satisfaction in tea and bread and butter. While Rabelais
roared with Friar John and the Monks, John Buncle gossiped with the
ladies; and with equal and uncontrolled gaiety. These two authors
possessed all the insolence of health, so that their works give a fillip
to the constitution; but they carried off the exuberance of their
natural spirits in different ways. The title of one of Rabelais’
chapters (and the contents answer to the title) is—‘How they chirped
over their cups.’ The title of a corresponding chapter in John Buncle
would run thus: ‘The author is invited to spend the evening with the
divine Miss Hawkins, and goes accordingly, with the delightful
conversation that ensued.’ Natural philosophers are said to extract
sun-beams from ice: our author has performed the same feat upon the
cold, quaint subtleties of theology. His constitutional alacrity
overcomes every obstacle. He converts the thorns and briars of
controversial divinity into a bed of roses. He leads the most refined
and virtuous of their sex through the mazes of inextricable problems
with the air of a man walking a minuet in a drawing-room; mixes up in
the most natural and careless manner the academy of compliments with the
rudiments of algebra; or passes with rapturous indifference from the
First of St. John and a disquisition on the Logos, to the no less
metaphysical doctrines of the principle of self-preservation, or the
continuation of the species. _John Buncle_ is certainly one of the most
singular productions in the language; and herein lies its peculiarity.
It is a Unitarian romance; and one in which the soul and body are
equally attended to. The hero is a great philosopher, mathematician,
anatomist, chemist, philologist, and divine, with a good appetite, the
best spirits, and an amorous constitution, who sets out on a series of
strange adventures to propagate his philosophy, his divinity, and his
species, and meets with a constant succession of accomplished females,
adorned with equal beauty, wit, and virtue, who are always ready to
discuss all kinds of theoretical and practical points with him. His
angels (and all his women are angels) have all taken their degrees in
more than one science: love is natural to them. He is sure to find

                ‘A mistress and a saint in every grove.’

Pleasure and business, wisdom and mirth, take their turns with the most
agreeable regularity. _A jocis ad seria, in seriis vicissim ad jocos
transire._ After a chapter of calculations in fluxions, or on the
descent of tongues, the lady and gentleman fall from Platonics to
hoydening, in a manner as truly edifying as anything in the scenes of
Vanbrugh or Sir George Etherege. No writer ever understood so well the
art of relief. The effect is like travelling in Scotland, and coming all
of a sudden to a spot of habitable ground. His mode of making love is
admirable. He takes it quite easily, and never thinks of a refusal. His
success gives him confidence, and his confidence gives him success. For
example: in the midst of one of his rambles in the mountains of
Cumberland, he unexpectedly comes to an elegant country-seat, where,
walking on the lawn with a book in her hand, he sees a most enchanting
creature, the owner of the mansion: our hero is on fire, leaps the ha-ha
which separates them, presents himself before the lady with an easy but
respectful air, begs to know the subject of her meditation, they enter
into conversation, mutual explanations take place, a declaration of love
is made, and the wedding-day is fixed for the following Tuesday. Our
author now leads a life of perfect happiness with his beautiful Miss
Noel, in a charming solitude, for a few weeks; till, on his return from
one of his rambles in the mountains, he finds her a corpse. He ‘_sits
with his eyes shut for seven days_,’ absorbed in silent grief; he then
bids adieu to melancholy reflections, not being one of that sect of
philosophers who think that ‘man was made to mourn,’—takes horse and
sets out for the nearest watering-place. As he alights at the first inn
on the road, a lady dressed in a rich green riding-habit steps out of a
coach, John Buncle hands her into the inn, they drink tea together, they
converse, they find an exact harmony of sentiment, a declaration of love
follows as a matter of course, and that day week they are married.
Death, however, contrives to keep up the ball for him; he marries seven
wives in succession, and buries them all. In short, John Buncle’s
gravity sat upon him with the happiest indifference possible. He danced
the hays with religion and morality with the ease of a man of fashion
and of pleasure. He was determined to see fair-play between grace and
nature, between his immortal and his mortal part, and in case of any
difficulty, upon the principle of ‘first come, first served,’ made sure
of the present hour. We sometimes suspect him of a little hypocrisy, but
upon a closer inspection, it appears to be only an affectation of
hypocrisy. His fine constitution comes to his relief, and floats him
over the shoals and quicksands that lie in his way, ‘most dolphin-like.’
You see him from mere happiness of nature chuckling with inward
satisfaction in the midst of his periodical penances, his grave
grimaces, his death’s-heads, and _memento moris_.

                             ——‘And there the antic sits
             Mocking his state, and grinning at his pomp.’

As men make use of olives to give a relish to their wine, so John Buncle
made use of philosophy to give a relish to life. He stops in a ball-room
at Harrowgate to moralise on the small number of faces that appeared
there out of those he remembered some years before: all were gone whom
he saw at a still more distant period; but this casts no damper on his
spirits, and he only dances the longer and better for it. He suffers
nothing unpleasant to remain long upon his mind. He gives, in one place,
a miserable description of two emaciated valetudinarians whom he met at
an inn, supping a little mutton-broth with difficulty, but he
immediately contrasts himself with them in fine relief. ‘While I beheld
things with astonishment, the servant,’ he says, ‘brought in dinner—a
pound of rump-steaks and a quart of green peas, two cuts of bread, a
tankard of strong beer, and a pint of port-wine; _with a fine appetite,
I soon despatched my mess, and over my wine, to help digestion, began to
sing the following lines_!’ The astonishment of the two strangers was
now as great as his own had been.

We wish to enable our readers to judge for themselves of the style of
our whimsical moralist, but are at a loss what to chuse—whether his
account of his man O’Fin; or of his friend Tom Fleming; or of his being
chased over the mountains by robbers, ‘whisking before them like the
wind away,’ as if it were high sport; or his address to the Sun, which
is an admirable piece of serious eloquence; or his character of six
Irish gentlemen, Mr. Gollogher, Mr. Gallaspy, Mr. Dunkley, Mr. Makins,
Mr. Monaghan, and Mr. O’Keefe, the last ‘descended from the Irish kings,
and first cousin to the great O’Keefe, who was buried not long ago in
Westminster Abbey.’ He professes to give an account of these Irish
gentlemen, ‘for the honour of Ireland, and as they were curiosities of
the human kind.’ Curiosities, indeed, but not so great as their
historian!

‘Mr. Makins was the only one of the set who was not tall and handsome.
He was a very low, thin man, not four feet high, and had but one eye,
with which he squinted most shockingly. But as he was matchless on the
fiddle, sung well, and chatted agreeably, he was a favourite with the
ladies. They preferred ugly Makins (as he was called) to many very
handsome men. He was a Unitarian.’

‘Mr. Monaghan was an honest and charming fellow. This gentleman and Mr.
Dunkley married ladies they fell in love with at Harrowgate Wells;
Dunkley had the fair Alcmena, Miss Cox of Northumberland; and Monaghan,
Antiope with haughty charms, Miss Pearson of Cumberland. They lived very
happy many years, and their children, I hear, are settled in Ireland.’

Gentle reader, here is the character of Mr. Gallaspy:

‘Gallaspy was the tallest and strongest man I have ever seen, well made,
and very handsome: had wit and abilities, sung well, and talked with
great sweetness and fluency, but was so extremely wicked that it were
better for him if he had been a natural fool. By his vast strength and
activity, his riches and eloquence, few things could withstand him. He
was the most profane swearer I have known: fought every thing, whored
every thing, and drank seven in hand: that is, seven glasses so placed
between the fingers of his right hand, that, in drinking, the liquor
fell into the next glasses, and thereby he drank out of the first glass
seven glasses at once. This was a common thing, I find from a book in my
possession, in the reign of Charles II., in the madness that followed
the restoration of that profligate and worthless prince.[42] But this
gentleman was the only man I ever saw who could or would attempt to do
it; and he made but one gulp of whatever he drank. He did not swallow a
fluid like other people, but if it was a quart, poured it in as from
pitcher to pitcher. When he smoked tobacco, he always blew two pipes at
once, one at each corner of his mouth, and threw the smoke out at both
his nostrils. He had killed two men in duels before I left Ireland, and
would have been hanged, but that it was his good fortune to be tried
before a judge who never let any man suffer for killing another in this
manner. (This was the late Sir John St. Leger.) He debauched all the
women he could, and many whom he could not corrupt....’ The rest of this
passage would, we fear, be too rich for the Round Table, as we cannot
insert it, in the manner of Mr. Buncle, in a sandwich of theology.
Suffice it to say, that the candour is greater than the candour of
Voltaire’s _Candide_, and the modesty equal to Colley Cibber’s.

To his friend Mr. Gollogher, he consecrates the following irresistible
_petit souvenir_:

‘He might, if he had pleased, have married any one of the most
illustrious and richest women in the kingdom; but he had an aversion to
matrimony, and could not bear the thoughts of a wife. Love and a bottle
were his taste: he was, however, the most honourable of men in his
amours, and never abandoned any woman in distress, as too many men of
fortune do, when they have gratified desire. All the distressed were
ever sharers in Mr. Gollogher’s fine estate, and especially the girls he
had taken to his breast. He provided happily for them all, and left
nineteen daughters he had by several women, a thousand pounds each. This
was acting with a temper worthy of a man; _and to the memory of the
benevolent Tom Gollogher, I devote this memorandum_.’

Lest our readers should form rather a coarse idea of our author from the
foregoing passages, we will conclude with another list of friends in a
different style:

‘The Conniving-house (as the gentlemen of Trinity called it in my time,
and long after) was a little public-house, kept by Jack Macklean, about
a quarter of a mile beyond Rings-end, on the top of the beach, within a
few yards of the sea. Here we used to have the finest fish at all times;
and, in the season, green peas, and all the most excellent vegetables.
The ale here was always extraordinary, and everything the best; which,
with its delightful situation, rendered it a delightful place of a
summer’s evening. Many a delightful evening have I passed in this pretty
thatched house with the famous Larry Grogan, who played on the bagpipes
extremely well; dear Jack Lattin, matchless on the fiddle, and the most
agreeable of companions; that ever-charming young fellow, Jack Wall, the
most worthy, the most ingenious, the most engaging of men, the son of
Counsellor Maurice Wall; and many other delightful fellows, who went in
the days of their youth to the shades of eternity. When I think of them
and their evening songs—‘_We will go to Johnny Macklean’s, to try if his
ale be good or no_,’ etc. and that years and infirmities begin to
oppress me—What is life!’

We have another English author, very different from the last mentioned
one, but equal in _naïveté_, and in the perfect display of personal
character; we mean Isaac Walton, who wrote the _Complete Angler_. That
well-known work has an extreme simplicity, and an extreme interest,
arising out of its very simplicity. In the description of a fishing
tackle you perceive the piety and humanity of the author’s mind. This is
the best pastoral in the language, not excepting Pope’s or Philips’s. We
doubt whether Sannazarius’s _Piscatory Eclogues_ are equal to the scenes
described by Walton on the banks of the River Lea. He gives the feeling
of the open air. We walk with him along the dusty roadside, or repose on
the banks of the river under a shady tree, and in watching for the finny
prey, imbibe what he beautifully calls ‘the patience and simplicity of
poor, honest fishermen.’ We accompany them to their inn at night, and
partake of their simple but delicious fare, while Maud, the pretty
milkmaid, at her mother’s desire, sings the classical ditties of Sir
Walter Raleigh. Good cheer is not neglected in this work, any more than
in _John Buncle_, or any other history which sets a proper value on the
good things of life. The prints in the _Complete Angler_ give an
additional reality and interest to the scenes it describes. While
Tottenham Cross shall stand, and longer, thy work, amiable and happy old
man, shall last![43]

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 15.]              ON THE CAUSES OF METHODISM        [OCT. 22, 1815.

The first Methodist on record was David. He was the first eminent person
we read of, who made a regular compromise between religion and morality,
between faith and good works. After any trifling peccadillo in point of
conduct, as a murder, adultery, perjury, or the like, he ascended with
his harp into some high tower of his palace; and having chaunted, in a
solemn strain of poetical inspiration, the praises of piety and virtue,
made his peace with heaven and his own conscience. This extraordinary
genius, in the midst of his personal errors, retained the same lofty
abstract enthusiasm for the favourite objects of his contemplation; the
character of the poet and the prophet remained unimpaired by the vices
of the man—

                ‘Pure in the last recesses of the mind’;

and the best test of the soundness of his principles and the elevation
of his sentiments, is, that they were proof against his practice. The
Gnostics afterwards maintained, that it was no matter what a man’s
actions were, so that his understanding was not debauched by them—so
that his opinions continued uncontaminated, and _his heart_, as the
phrase is, _right towards God_. Strictly speaking, this sect (whatever
name it might go by) is as old as human nature itself; for it has
existed ever since there was a contradiction between the passions and
the understanding—between what we are, and what we desire to be. The
principle of Methodism is nearly allied to hypocrisy, and almost
unavoidably slides into it: yet it is not the same thing; for we can
hardly call any one a hypocrite, however much at variance his
professions and his actions, who really wishes to be what he would be
thought.

The Jewish bard, whom we have placed at the head of this class of
devotees, was of a sanguine and robust temperament. Whether he chose ‘to
sinner it or saint it,’ he did both most royally, with a fulness of
gusto, and carried off his penances and his _faux-pas_ in a style of
oriental grandeur. This is by no means the character of his followers
among ourselves, who are a most pitiful set. They may rather be
considered as a collection of religious invalids; as the refuse of all
that is weak and unsound in body and mind. To speak of them as they
deserve, they are not well in the flesh, and therefore they take refuge
in the spirit; they are not comfortable here, and they seek for the life
to come; they are deficient in steadiness of moral principle, and they
trust to grace to make up the deficiency; they are dull and gross in
apprehension, and therefore they are glad to substitute faith for
reason, and to plunge in the dark, under the supposed sanction of
superior wisdom, into every species of mystery and jargon. This is the
history of Methodism, which may be defined to be religion with its
slobbering-bib and go-cart. It is a bastard kind of Popery, stripped of
its painted pomp and outward ornaments, and reduced to a state of
pauperism. ‘The whole need not a physician.’ Popery owed its success to
its constant appeal to the senses and to the weaknesses of mankind. The
Church of England deprives the Methodists of the pride and pomp of the
Romish Church; but it has left open to them the appeal to the indolence,
the ignorance, and the vices of the people; and the secret of the
success of the Catholic faith and evangelical preaching is the same—both
are a religion by proxy. What the one did by auricular confession,
absolution, penance, pictures, and crucifixes, the other does, even more
compendiously, by grace, election, faith without works, and words
without meaning.

In the first place, the same reason makes a man a religious enthusiast
that makes a man an enthusiast in any other way, an uncomfortable mind
in an uncomfortable body. Poets, authors, and artists in general, have
been ridiculed for a pining, puritanical, poverty-struck appearance,
which has been attributed to their real poverty. But it would perhaps be
nearer the truth to say, that their being poets, artists, etc. has been
owing to their original poverty of spirit and weakness of constitution.
As a general rule, those who are dissatisfied with themselves, will seek
to go out of themselves into an ideal world. Persons in strong health
and spirits, who take plenty of air and exercise, who are ‘in favour
with their stars,’ and have a thorough relish of the good things of this
life, seldom devote themselves in despair to religion or the Muses.
Sedentary, nervous, hypochondriacal people, on the contrary, are forced,
for want of an appetite for the real and substantial, to look out for a
more airy food and speculative comforts. ‘Conceit in weakest bodies
strongest works.’ A journeyman sign-painter, whose lungs have imbibed
too great a quantity of the effluvia of white-lead, will be seized with
a fantastic passion for the stage; and _Mawworm_, tired of standing
behind his counter, was eager to mount a tub, mistaking the suppression
of his animal spirits for the communication of the Holy Ghost![44] If
you live near a chapel or tabernacle in London, you may almost always
tell, from physiognomical signs, which of the passengers will turn the
corner to go there. We were once staying in a remote place in the
country, where a chapel of this sort had been erected by the force of
missionary zeal; and one morning, we perceived a long procession of
people coming from the next town to the consecration of this same
chapel. Never was there such a set of scarecrows. Melancholy tailors,
consumptive hair-dressers, squinting cobblers, women with child or in
the ague, made up the forlorn hope of the pious cavalcade. The pastor of
this half-starved flock, we confess, came riding after, with a more
goodly aspect, as if he had ‘with sound of bell been knolled to church,
and sat at good men’s feasts.’ He had in truth lately married a thriving
widow, and been pampered with hot suppers to strengthen the flesh and
the spirit. We have seen several of these ‘round fat oily men of God,

             “That shone all glittering with ungodly dew.”’

They grow sleek and corpulent by getting into better pasture, but they
do not appear healthy. They retain the original sin of their
constitution, an atrabilious taint in their complexion, and do not put a
right-down, hearty, honest, good-looking face upon the matter, like the
regular clergy.

Again, Methodism, by its leading doctrines, has a peculiar charm for all
those, who have an equal facility in sinning and repenting,—in whom the
spirit is willing but the flesh is weak,—who have neither fortitude to
withstand temptation, nor to silence the admonitions of conscience,—who
like the theory of religion better than the practice, and who are
willing to indulge in all the raptures of speculative devotion, without
being tied down to the dull, literal performance of its duties. There is
a general propensity in the human mind (even in the most vicious) to pay
virtue a distant homage; and this desire is only checked by the fear of
condemning ourselves by our own acknowledgments. What an admirable
expedient then in ‘that burning and shining light,’ Whitefield, and his
associates, to make this very disposition to admire and extol the
highest patterns of goodness, a substitute for, instead of an obligation
to, the practice of virtue, to allow us to be quit for ‘the vice that
most easily besets us,’ by canting lamentations over the depravity of
human nature, and loud hosannahs to the Son of David! How comfortably
this doctrine must sit on all those who are loth to give up old habits
of vice, or are just tasting the sweets of new ones; on the withered hag
who looks back on a life of dissipation, or the young devotee who looks
forward to a life of pleasure; the knavish tradesman retiring from
business or entering on it; the battered rake; the sneaking politician,
who trims between his place and his conscience, wriggling between heaven
and earth, a miserable two-legged creature, with sanctified face and
fawning gestures; the maudling sentimentalist, the religious prostitute,
the disinterested poet-laureate, the humane war-contractor, or the
Society for the Suppression of Vice! This scheme happily turns morality
into a sinecure, takes all the practical drudgery and trouble off your
hands, ‘and sweet religion makes a rhapsody of words.’ Its proselytes
besiege the gates of heaven, like sturdy beggars about the doors of the
great, lie and bask in the sunshine of divine grace, sigh and groan and
bawl out for mercy, expose their sores and blotches to excite
commiseration, and cover the deformities of their nature with a garb of
borrowed righteousness!

The jargon and nonsense which are so studiously inculcated in the
system, are another powerful recommendation of it to the vulgar. It does
not impose any tax upon the understanding. Its essence is to be
unintelligible. It is _carte blanche_ for ignorance and folly! Those,
‘numbers without number,’ who are either unable or unwilling to think
connectedly or rationally on any subject, are at once released from
every obligation of the kind, by being told that faith and reason are
opposed to one another, and the greater the impossibility, the greater
the merit of the faith. A set of phrases which, without conveying any
distinct idea, excite our wonder, our fear, our curiosity and desires,
which let loose the imagination of the gaping multitude, and confound
and baffle common sense, are the common stock-in-trade of the
conventicle. They never stop for the distinctions of the understanding,
and have thus got the start of other sects, who are so hemmed in with
the necessity of giving reasons for their opinions, that they cannot get
on at all. ‘Vital Christianity’ is no other than an attempt to lower all
religion to the level of the capacities of the lowest of the people. One
of their favourite places of worship combines the noise and turbulence
of a drunken brawl at an ale-house, with the indecencies of a bagnio.
They strive to gain a vertigo by abandoning their reason, and give
themselves up to the intoxications of a distempered zeal, that

               ‘Dissolves them into ecstasies,
               And brings all heaven before their eyes.’

Religion, without superstition, will not answer the purposes of
fanaticism, and we may safely say, that almost every sect of
Christianity is a perversion of its essence, to accommodate it to the
prejudices of the world. The Methodists have greased the boots of the
Presbyterians, and they have done well. While the latter are weighing
their doubts and scruples to the division of a hair, and shivering on
the narrow brink that divides philosophy from religion, the former
plunge without remorse into hell-flames, soar on the wings of divine
love, are carried away with the motions of the spirit, are lost in the
abyss of unfathomable mysteries,—election, reprobation,
predestination,—and revel in a sea of boundless nonsense. It is a gulf
that swallows up every thing. The cold, the calculating, and the dry,
are not to the taste of the many; religion is an anticipation of the
preternatural world, and it in general requires preternatural
excitements to keep it alive. If it takes a definite consistent form, it
loses its interest: to produce its effect it must come in the shape of
an apparition. Our quacks treat grown people as the nurses do
children;—terrify them with what they have no idea of, or take them to a
puppet-show.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 16.]            ON THE MIDSUMMER NIGHT’S DREAM      [NOV. 26, 1815.

Bottom the weaver is a character that has not had justice done him. He
is the most romantic of mechanics. And what a list of companions he
has—_Quince_ the carpenter, _Snug_ the joiner, _Flute_ the
bellows-mender, _Snout_ the tinker, _Starveling_ the tailor; and then,
again, what a group of fairy attendants, _Puck_, _Peaseblossom_,
_Cobweb_, _Moth_, and _Mustard-seed_! It has been observed that
Shakspeare’s characters are constructed upon deep physiological
principles; and there is something in this play which looks very like
it. _Bottom_ the weaver, who takes the lead of

               ‘This crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
               That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,’

follows a sedentary trade, and he is accordingly represented as
conceited, serious, and fantastical. He is ready to undertake any thing
and every thing, as if it was as much a matter of course as the motion
of his loom and shuttle. He is for playing the tyrant, the lover, the
lady, the lion. ‘He will roar that it shall do any man’s heart good to
hear him’; and this being objected to as improper, he still has a
resource in his good opinion of himself, and ‘will roar you an ‘twere
any nightingale.’ _Snug_ the joiner is the moral man of the piece, who
proceeds by measurement and discretion in all things. You see him with
his rule and compasses in his hand. ‘Have you the lion’s part written?
Pray you, if it be, give it me, for I am slow of study.’ ‘You may do it
extempore,’ says _Quince_, ‘for it is nothing but roaring.’ _Starveling_
the tailor keeps the peace, and objects to the lion and the drawn sword:
‘I believe we must leave the killing out, when all’s done.’
_Starveling_, however, does not start the objections himself, but
seconds them when made by others, as if he had not spirit to express his
fears without encouragement. It is too much to suppose all this
intentional: but it very luckily falls out so. Nature includes all that
is implied in the most subtle and analytical distinctions; and the same
distinctions will be found in Shakspeare. _Bottom_, who is not only
chief actor, but stage-manager for the occasion, has a device to obviate
the danger of frightening the ladies: ‘Write me a prologue, and let the
prologue seem to say, we will do him no harm with our swords, and that
Pyramus is not killed indeed; and for better assurance, tell them that
I, Pyramus, am not Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver; this will put them
out of fear.’ _Bottom_ seems to have understood the subject of dramatic
illusion at least as well as any modern essayist. If our holiday
mechanic rules the roast among his fellows, he is no less at home in his
new character of an ass, ‘with amiable cheeks and fair large ears.’ He
instinctively acquires a most learned taste, and grows fastidious in the
choice of dried peas and bottled hay. He is quite familiar with his new
attendants, and assigns them their parts with all due gravity. ‘Monsieur
_Cobweb_, good Monsieur, get your weapon in your hand, and kill me a
red-hipt humble bee on the top of a thistle, and good Monsieur, bring me
the honey-bag.’ What an exact knowledge is shewn here of natural
history!

_Puck_ or _Robin Goodfellow_ is the leader of the fairy band. He is the
_Ariel_ of the _Midsummer Night’s Dream_; and yet as unlike as can be to
the _Ariel_ in the _Tempest_. No other poet could have made two such
different characters out of the same fanciful materials and situations.
_Ariel_ is a minister of retribution, who is touched with a sense of
pity at the woes he inflicts. _Puck_ is a mad-cap sprite, full of
wantonness and mischief, who laughs at those whom he misleads: ‘Lord,
what fools these mortals be!’ _Ariel_ cleaves the air, and executes his
mission with the zeal of a winged messenger: _Puck_ is borne along on
his fairy errand, like the light and glittering gossamer before the
breeze. He is, indeed, a most Epicurean little gentleman, dealing in
quaint devices, and faring in dainty delights. _Prospero_ and his world
of spirits are a set of moralists: but with _Oberon_ and his fairies we
are launched at once into the empire of the butterflies. How beautifully
is this race of beings contrasted with the men and women actors in the
scene, by a single epithet which _Titania_ gives to the latter, ‘the
human mortals’! It is astonishing that Shakspeare should be considered,
not only by foreigners, but by many of our own critics, as a gloomy and
heavy writer, who painted nothing but ‘Gorgons and Hydras and Chimeras
dire.’ His subtlety exceeds that of all other dramatic writers, insomuch
that a celebrated person of the present day said, that he regarded him
rather as a metaphysician than a poet. His delicacy and sportive gaiety
are infinite. In the _Midsummer Night’s Dream_ alone, we should imagine,
there is more sweetness and beauty of description than in the whole
range of French poetry put together. What we mean is this, that we will
produce out of that single play ten passages, to which we do not think
any ten passages in the works of the French poets can be opposed,
displaying equal fancy and imagery. Shall we mention the remonstrance of
_Helena_ to _Hermia_, or _Titania’s_ description of her fairy train, or
her disputes with _Oberon_ about the Indian boy, or _Puck’s_ account of
himself and his employments, or the Fairy Queen’s exhortation to the
elves to pay due attendance upon her favourite _Bottom_,[45] or
_Hippolyta’s_ description of a chace, or _Theseus’s_ answer? The two
last are as heroical and spirited, as the others are full of luscious
tenderness. The reading of this play is like wandering in a grove by
moonlight: the descriptions breathe a sweetness like odours thrown from
beds of flowers.

Shakspeare is almost the only poet of whom it may be said, that

                  ‘Age cannot wither, nor custom stale
                  His infinite variety.’

His nice touches of individual character, and marking of its different
gradations, have been often admired; but the instances have not been
exhausted, because they are inexhaustible. We will mention two which
occur to us. One is where _Christopher Sly_ expresses his approbation of
the play, by saying, ‘’Tis a good piece of work, would ‘twere done,’ as
if he were thinking of his Saturday night’s job. Again, there cannot
well be a finer gradation of character than that in Henry IV. between
_Falstaff_ and _Shallow_, and _Shallow_ and _Silence_. It seems
difficult to fall lower than the Squire; but this fool, great as he is,
finds an admirer and humble foil in his cousin _Silence_. Vain of his
acquaintance with _Sir John_, who makes a butt of him, he exclaims,
‘Would, cousin _Silence_, that thou had’st seen that which this Knight
and I have seen!’ ‘Aye, master _Shallow_, we have heard the chimes at
midnight,’ says _Sir John_. The true spirit of humanity, the thorough
knowledge of the stuff we are made of, the practical wisdom with the
seeming fooleries, in the whole of this exquisite scene, and afterwards
in the dialogue on the death of old _Double_, have no parallel anywhere
else.

It has been suggested to us, that the _Midsummer Night’s Dream_ would do
admirably to get up as a Christmas after-piece; and our prompter
proposes that Mr. Kean should play the part of _Bottom_, as worthy of
his great talents. He might offer to play the lady like any of our
actresses that he pleased, the lover or the tyrant like any of our
actors that he pleased, and the lion like ‘the most fearful wild fowl
living.’ The carpenter, the tailor, and joiner, would hit the galleries.
The young ladies in love would interest the side-boxes, and _Robin
Goodfellow_ and his companions excite a lively fellow-feeling in the
children from school. There would be two courts, an empire within an
empire, the Athenian and the Fairy King and Queen, with their
attendants, and with all their finery. What an opportunity for
processions, for the sound of trumpets, and glittering of spears! What a
fluttering of urchins’ painted wings; what a delightful profusion of
gauze clouds, and airy spirits floating on them! It would be a complete
English fairy tale.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 17.]                 ON THE BEGGAR’S OPERA          [JUNE 18, 1815.

We have begun this Essay on a very coarse sheet of damaged foolscap, and
we find that we are going to write it, whether for the sake of contrast,
or from having a very fine pen, in a remarkably nice hand. Something of
a similar process seems to have taken place in Gay’s mind, when he
composed his _Beggar’s Opera_. He chose a very unpromising ground to
work upon, and he has prided himself in adorning it with all the graces,
the precision and brilliancy of style. It is a vulgar error to call this
a vulgar play. So far from it, that we do not scruple to declare our
opinion that it is one of the most refined productions in the language.
The elegance of the composition is in exact proportion to the coarseness
of the materials: by ‘happy alchemy of mind,’ the author has extracted
an essence of refinement from the dregs of human life, and turns its
very dross into gold. The scenes, characters, and incidents are, in
themselves, of the lowest and most disgusting kind: but, by the
sentiments and reflections which are put into the mouths of highwaymen,
turnkeys, their mistresses, wives, or daughters, he has converted this
motley group into a set of fine gentlemen and ladies, satirists and
philosophers. He has also effected this transformation without once
violating probability, or ‘o’erstepping the modesty of nature.’ In fact
Gay has turned the tables on the critics; and by the assumed licence of
the mock-heroic style, has enabled himself to _do justice to nature_,
that is, to give all the force, truth, and locality of real feeling to
the thoughts and expressions, without being called to the bar of false
taste and affected delicacy. The extreme beauty and feeling of the song,
‘Woman is like the fair flower in its lustre,’ is only equalled by its
characteristic propriety and _naïveté_. It may be said that this is
taken from Tibullus; but there is nothing about Covent Garden in
Tibullus. _Polly_ describes her lover going to the gallows with the same
touching simplicity, and with all the natural fondness of a young girl
in her circumstances, who sees in his approaching catastrophe nothing
but the misfortunes and the personal accomplishments of the object of
her affections. ‘I see him sweeter than the nosegay in his hand: the
admiring crowd lament that so lovely a youth should come to an untimely
end:—even butchers weep, and Jack Ketch refuses his fee rather than
consent to tie the fatal knot.’ The preservation of the character and
costume is complete. It has been said by a great authority, ‘There is
some soul of goodness in things evil’: and the _Beggar’s Opera_ is a
good-natured but instructive comment on this text. The poet has thrown
all the gaiety and sunshine of the imagination, all the intoxication of
pleasure, and the vanity of despair, round the short-lived existence of
his heroes; while _Peachum_ and _Lockitt_ are seen in the back-ground,
parcelling out their months and weeks between them. The general view
exhibited of human life, is of the most masterly and abstracted kind.
The author has, with great felicity, brought out the good qualities and
interesting emotions almost inseparable from the lowest conditions; and
with the same penetrating glance has detected the disguises which rank
and circumstances lend to exalted vice. Every line in this sterling
comedy sparkles with wit, and is fraught with the keenest sarcasm. The
very wit, however, takes off from the offensiveness of the satire; and
we have seen great statesmen, very great statesmen, heartily enjoying
the joke, laughing most immoderately at the compliments paid to them as
not much worse than pickpockets and cut-throats in a different line of
life, and pleased, as it were, to see themselves humanised by some sort
of fellowship with their kind. Indeed, it may be said that the moral of
the piece is to show the _vulgarity_ of vice; and that the same
violations of integrity and decorum, the same habitual sophistry in
palliating their want of principle, are common to the great and
powerful, with the lowest and most contemptible of the species. What can
be more convincing than the arguments used by these would-be
politicians, to shew that in hypocrisy, selfishness, and treachery, they
do not come up to many of their betters? The exclamation of _Mrs.
Peachum_, when her daughter marries _Macheath_, ‘Hussey, hussey, you
will be as ill used, and as much neglected, as if you had married a
lord,’ is worth all Miss Hannah More’s laboured invectives on the laxity
of the manners of high life![46]

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 18.]               ON PATRIOTISM.—A FRAGMENT         [JAN. 5, 1814.

Patriotism, in modern times, and in great states, is and must be the
creature of reason and reflection, rather than the offspring of physical
or local attachment. Our country is a complex, abstract existence,
recognised only by the understanding. It is an immense riddle,
containing numberless modifications of reason and prejudice, of thought
and passion. Patriotism is not, in a strict or exclusive sense, a
natural or personal affection, but a law of our rational and moral
nature, strengthened and determined by particular circumstances and
associations, but not born of them, nor wholly nourished by them. It is
not possible that we should have an individual attachment to sixteen
millions of men, any more than to sixty millions. We cannot be
_habitually_ attached to places we never saw, and people we never heard
of. Is not the name of Englishman a general term, as well as that of
man? How many varieties does it not combine within it? Are the opposite
extremities of the globe our native place, because they are a part of
that geographical and political denomination, our country? Does natural
affection expand in circles of latitude and longitude? What personal or
instinctive sympathy has the English peasant with the African
slave-driver, or East Indian Nabob? Some of our wretched bunglers in
metaphysics would fain persuade us to discard all general humanity, and
all sense of abstract justice, as a violation of natural affection, and
yet do not see that the love of our country itself is in the list of our
general affections. The common notions of patriotism are transmitted
down to us from the savage tribes, where the fate and condition of all
was the same, or from the states of Greece and Rome, where the country
of the citizen was the town in which he was born. Where this is no
longer the case,—where our country is no longer contained within the
narrow circle of the same walls,—where we can no longer behold its
glimmering horizon from the top of our native mountains—beyond these
limits, it is not a natural but an artificial idea, and our love of it
either a deliberate dictate of reason, or a cant term. It was said by an
acute observer, and eloquent writer (Rousseau) that the love of mankind
was nothing but the love of justice: the same might be said, with
considerable truth, of the love of our country. It is little more than
another name for the love of liberty, of independence, of peace, and
social happiness. We do not say that other indirect and collateral
circumstances do not go to the superstructure of this sentiment (as
language,[47] literature, manners, national customs), but this is the
broad and firm basis.


 NO. 19.]                       ON BEAUTY                 [FEB. 4, 1816.

It is about sixty years ago that Sir Joshua Reynolds, in three papers
which he wrote in the _Idler_, advanced the notion, which has prevailed
very much ever since, that Beauty was entirely dependent on custom, or
on the conformity of objects to a given standard. Now, we could never
persuade ourselves that custom, or the association of ideas, though a
very powerful, was the only principle of the preference which the mind
gives to certain objects over others. Novelty is surely one source of
pleasure; otherwise we cannot account for the well-known epigram,
beginning—

            ‘Two happy things in marriage are allowed,’ etc.

Nor can we help thinking, that, besides custom, or the conformity of
certain objects to others of the same general class, there is also a
certain conformity of objects to themselves, a symmetry of parts, a
principle of proportion, gradation, harmony (call it what you will),
which makes certain things naturally pleasing or beautiful, and the want
of it the contrary.

We will not pretend to define what Beauty is, after so many learned
authors have failed; but we shall attempt to give some examples of what
constitutes it, to shew that it is in some way inherent in the object,
and that if custom is a second nature, there is another nature which
ranks before it. Indeed, the idea that all pleasure and pain depend on
the association of ideas is manifestly absurd: there must be something
in itself pleasurable or painful, before it could become possible for
the feelings of pleasure or pain to be transferred by association from
one object to another.

Regular features are generally accounted handsome; but regular features
are those, the outlines of which answer most nearly to each other, or
undergo the fewest abrupt changes. We shall attempt to explain this idea
by a reference to the Greek and African face; the first of which is
beautiful, because it is made up of lines corresponding with or melting
into each other: the last is not so, because it is made up almost
entirely of contradictory lines and sharp angular projections.

The general principle of the difference between the two heads is this:
the forehead of the Greek is square and upright, and, as it were,
overhangs the rest of the face, except the nose, which is a continuation
of it almost in an even line. In the Negro or African, the tip of the
nose is the most projecting part of the face; and from that point the
features retreat back, both upwards towards the forehead, and downwards
to the chin. This last form is an approximation to the shape of the head
of the animal, as the former bears the strongest stamp of humanity.

The Grecian nose is regular, the African irregular. In other words, the
Grecian nose seen in profile forms nearly a straight line with the
forehead, and falls into the upper lip by two curves, which balance one
another: seen in front, the two sides are nearly parallel to each other,
and the nostrils and lower part form regular curves, answering to one
another, and to the contours of the mouth. On the contrary, the African
pug-nose is more ‘like an ace of clubs.’ Whichever way you look at it,
it presents the appearance of a triangle. It is narrow, and drawn to a
point at top, broad and flat at bottom. The point is peaked, and recedes
abruptly to the level of the forehead or the mouth, and the nostrils are
as if they were drawn up with hooks towards each other. All the lines
cross each other at sharp angles. The forehead of the Greeks is flat and
square, till it is rounded at the temples; the African forehead, like
the ape’s, falls back towards the top, and spreads out at the sides, so
as to form an angle with the cheek-bones. The eyebrows of the Greeks are
either straight, so as to sustain the lower part of the tablet of the
forehead, or gently arched, so as to form the outer circle of the curves
of the eyelids. The form of the eyes gives all the appearance of orbs,
full, swelling, and involved within each other; the African eyes are
flat, narrow at the corners, in the shape of a tortoise, and the
eyebrows fly off slantwise to the sides of the forehead. The idea of the
superiority of the Greek face in this respect is admirably expressed in
Spenser’s description of Belphœbe:

              ‘Her ivory forehead, full of bounty brave,
              Like a broad table did itself dispread,
              For love therein his triumphs to engrave,
              And write the battles of his great Godhead.

                     .       .       .       .       .

              Upon her eyelids many Graces sat
              Under the shadow of her even brows.’

The head of the girl in the _Transfiguration_ (which Raphael took from
the _Niobe_) has the same correspondence and exquisite involution of the
outline of the forehead, the eyebrows, and the eyes (circle within
circle) which we here speak of. Every part of that delightful head is
blended together, and every sharp projection moulded and softened down,
with the feeling of a sculptor, or as if nothing should be left to
offend the _touch_ as well as eye. Again, the Greek mouth is small, and
little wider than the lower part of the nose: the lips form waving
lines, nearly answering to each other; the African mouth is twice as
wide as the nose, projects in front, and falls back towards the ears—is
sharp and triangular, and consists of one protruding and one distended
lip. The chin of the Greek face is round and indented, curled in,
forming a fine oval with the outline of the cheeks, which resemble the
two halves of a plane parallel with the forehead, and rounded off like
it. The Negro chin falls inwards like a dew-lap, is nearly bisected in
the middle, flat at bottom, and joined abruptly to the rest of the face,
the whole contour of which is made up of jagged cross-grained lines. The
African physiognomy appears, indeed, splitting in pieces, starting out
in every oblique direction, and marked by the most sudden and violent
changes throughout: the whole of the Grecian face blends with itself in
a state of the utmost harmony and repose.[48] There is a harmony of
expression as well as a symmetry of form. We sometimes see a face
melting into beauty by the force of sentiment—an eye that, in its liquid
mazes, for ever expanding and for ever retiring within itself, draws the
soul after it, and tempts the rash beholder to his fate. This is,
perhaps, what Werter meant, when he says of Charlotte, ‘Her full dark
eyes are ever before me, like a sea, like a precipice.’ The historical
in expression is the consistent and harmonious,—whatever in thought or
feeling communicates the same movement, whether voluptuous or
impassioned, to all the parts of the face, the mouth, the eyes, the
forehead, and shews that they are all actuated by the same spirit. For
this reason it has been observed, that all intellectual and impassioned
faces are historical,—the heads of philosophers, poets, lovers, and
madmen.

Motion is beautiful as it implies either continuity or gradual change.
The motion of a hawk is beautiful, either returning in endless circles
with suspended wings, or darting right forward in one level line upon
its prey. We have, when boys, often watched the glittering down of the
thistle, at first scarcely rising above the ground, and then, mingling
with the gale, borne into the upper sky with varying fantastic motion.
How delightful, how beautiful! All motion is beautiful that is not
contradictory to itself,—that is free from sudden jerks and shocks,—that
is either sustained by the same impulse, or gradually reconciles
different impulses together. Swans resting on the calm bosom of a lake,
in which their image is reflected, or moved up and down with the heaving
of the waves, though by this the double image is disturbed, are equally
beautiful. Homer describes Mercury as flinging himself from the top of
Olympus, and skimming the surface of the ocean. This is lost in Pope’s
translation, who suspends him on the incumbent air. The beauty of the
original image consists in the idea which it conveys of smooth,
uninterrupted speed, of the evasion of every let or obstacle to the
progress of the God.[49] Awkwardness is occasioned by a difficulty in
moving, or by disjointed movements, that distract the attention and
defeat each other. Grace is the absence of every thing that indicates
pain or difficulty, or hesitation or incongruity. The only graceful
dancer we ever saw was Deshayes, the Frenchman. He came on bounding like
a stag. It was not necessary to have seen good dancing before to know
that this was really fine. Whoever has seen the sea in motion, the
branches of a tree waving in the air, would instantly perceive the
resemblance. Flexibility and grace are to be found in nature as well as
at the opera. Mr. Burke, in his Essay on the Sublime and Beautiful, has
very admirably described the bosom of a beautiful woman, almost entirely
with reference to the ideas of motion. Those outlines are beautiful
which describe pleasant motions. A fine use is made of this principle by
one of the apocryphal writers, in describing the form of the rainbow.
‘He hath set his bow in the heavens, and his hands have bended it.’
Harmony in colour has not been denied to be a natural property of
objects, consisting in the gradations of intermediate colours. The
principle appears to be here the same as in some of the former
instances. The effect of colour in Titian’s Bath of Diana, at the
Marquis of Stafford’s, is perhaps the finest in the world, made up of
the richest contrasts, blended together by the most masterly gradations.
Harmony of sound depends apparently on the same principle as harmony of
colour. Rhyme depends on the pleasure derived from a recurrence of
similar sounds, as symmetry of features does on the correspondence of
the different outlines. The prose style of Dr. Johnson originated in the
same principle. The secret consisted in rhyming on the sense, and
balancing one half of the sentence uniformly and systematically against
the other. The Hebrew poetry was constructed in the same manner.

                                                                      W.


 NO. 20.]                     ON IMITATION               [FEB. 18, 1816.

Objects in themselves disagreeable or indifferent, often please in the
imitation. A brick-floor, a pewter-plate, an ugly cur barking, a Dutch
boor smoking or playing at skittles, the inside of a shambles, a
fishmonger’s or a greengrocer’s stall, have been made very interesting
as pictures by the fidelity, skill, and spirit, with which they have
been copied. One source of the pleasure thus received is undoubtedly the
surprise or feeling of admiration, occasioned by the unexpected
coincidence between the imitation and the object. The deception,
however, not only pleases at first sight, or from mere novelty; but it
continues to please upon farther acquaintance, and in proportion to the
insight we acquire into the distinctions of nature and of art. By far
the most numerous class of connoisseurs are the admirers of pictures of
_still life_, which have nothing but the elaborateness of the execution
to recommend them. One chief reason, it should seem then, why imitation
pleases, is, because, by exciting curiosity, and inviting a comparison
between the object and the representation, it opens a new field of
inquiry, and leads the attention to a variety of details and
distinctions not perceived before. This latter source of the pleasure
derived from imitation has never been properly insisted on.

The anatomist is delighted with a coloured plate, conveying the exact
appearance of the progress of certain diseases, or of the internal parts
and dissections of the human body. We have known a Jennerian Professor
as much enraptured with a delineation of the different stages of
vaccination, as a florist with a bed of tulips, or an auctioneer with a
collection of Indian shells. But in this case, we find that not only the
imitation pleases,—the objects themselves give as much pleasure to the
professional inquirer, as they would pain to the uninitiated. The
learned amateur is struck with the beauty of the coats of the stomach
laid bare, or contemplates with eager curiosity the transverse section
of the brain, divided on the new Spurzheim principles. It is here, then,
the number of the parts, their distinctions, connections, structure,
uses; in short, an entire new set of ideas, which occupies the mind of
the student, and overcomes the sense of pain and repugnance, which is
the only feeling that the sight of a dead and mangled body presents to
ordinary men. It is the same in art as in science. The painter of still
life, as it is called, takes the same pleasure in the object as the
spectator does in the imitation; because by habit he is led to perceive
all those distinctions in nature, to which other persons never pay any
attention till they are pointed out to them in the picture. The vulgar
only see nature as it is reflected to them from art; the painter sees
the picture in nature, before he transfers it to the canvass. He
refines, he analyses, he remarks fifty things, which escape common eyes;
and this affords a distinct source of reflection and amusement to him,
independently of the beauty or grandeur of the objects themselves, or of
their connection with other impressions besides those of sight. The
charm of the Fine Arts, then, does not consist in any thing peculiar to
imitation, even where only imitation is concerned, since _there_, where
art exists in the highest perfection, namely, in the mind of the artist,
the object excites the same or greater pleasure, before the imitation
exists. Imitation renders an object, displeasing in itself, a source of
pleasure, not by repetition of the same idea, but by suggesting new
ideas, by detecting new properties, and endless shades of difference,
just as a close and continued contemplation of the object itself would
do. Art shows us nature, divested of the medium of our prejudices. It
divides and decompounds objects into a thousand curious parts, which may
be full of variety, beauty, and delicacy in themselves, though the
object to which they belong may be disagreeable in its general
appearance, or by association with other ideas. A painted marigold is
inferior to a painted rose only in form and colour: it loses nothing in
point of smell. Yellow hair is perfectly beautiful in a picture. To a
person lying with his face close to the ground in a summer’s day, the
blades of spear-grass will appear like tall forest trees, shooting up
into the sky; as an insect seen through a microscope is magnified into
an elephant. Art is the microscope of the mind, which sharpens the wit
as the other does the sight; and converts every object into a little
universe in itself.[50] Art may be said to draw aside the veil from
nature. To those who are perfectly unskilled in the practice, unimbued
with the principles of art, most objects present only a confused mass.
The pursuit of art is liable to be carried to a contrary excess, as
where it produces a rage for the _picturesque_. You cannot go a step
with a person of this class, but he stops you to point out some choice
bit of landscape, or fancied improvement, and teazes you almost to death
with the frequency and insignificance of his discoveries!

It is a common opinion, (which may be worth noticing here), that the
study of physiognomy has a tendency to make people satirical, and the
knowledge of art to make them fastidious in their taste. Knowledge may,
indeed, afford a handle to ill-nature; but it takes away the principal
temptation to its exercise, by supplying the mind with better resources
against _ennui_. Idiots are always mischievous; and the most superficial
persons are the most disposed to find fault, because they understand the
fewest things. The English are more apt than any other nation to treat
foreigners with contempt, because they seldom see anything but their own
dress and manners; and it is only in petty provincial towns that you
meet with persons who pride themselves on being satirical. In every
country place in England there are one or two persons of this
description who keep the whole neighbourhood in terror. It is not to be
denied that the study of the _ideal_ in art, if separated from the study
of nature, may have the effect above stated, of producing
dissatisfaction and contempt for everything but itself, as all
affectation must; but to the genuine artist, truth, nature, beauty, are
almost different names for the same thing.

Imitation interests, then, by exciting a more intense perception of
truth, and calling out the powers of observation and comparison:
wherever this effect takes place the interest follows of course, with or
without the imitation, whether the object is real or artificial. The
gardener delights in the streaks of a tulip, or ‘pansy freak’d with
jet’; the mineralogist in the varieties of certain strata, because he
understands them. Knowledge is pleasure as well as power. A work of art
has in this respect no advantage over a work of nature, except inasmuch
as it furnishes an additional stimulus to curiosity. Again, natural
objects please in proportion as they are uncommon, by fixing the
attention more steadily on their beauties or differences. The same
principle of the effect of novelty in exciting the attention, may
account, perhaps, for the extraordinary discoveries and lies told by
travellers, who, opening their eyes for the first time in foreign parts,
are startled at every object they meet.

Why the excitement of intellectual activity pleases, is not here the
question; but that it does so, is a general and acknowledged law of the
human mind. We grow attached to the mathematics only from finding out
their truth; and their utility chiefly consists (at present) in the
contemplative pleasure they afford to the student. Lines, points,
angles, squares, and circles are not interesting in themselves; they
become so by the power of mind exerted in comprehending their properties
and relations. People dispute for ever about Hogarth. The question has
not in one respect been fairly stated. The merit of his pictures does
not so much depend on the nature of the subject, as on the knowledge
displayed of it, on the number of ideas they excite, on the fund of
thought and observation contained in them. They are to be looked on as
works of science; they gratify our love of truth; they fill up the void
of the mind: they are a series of plates of natural history, and also of
that most interesting part of natural history, the history of man. The
superiority of high art over the common or mechanical consists in
combining truth of imitation with beauty and grandeur of subject. The
historical painter is superior to the flower-painter, because he
combines or ought to combine human interests and passions with the same
power of imitating external nature; or, indeed, with greater, for the
greatest difficulty of imitation is the power of imitating expression.
The difficulty of copying increases with our knowledge of the object;
and that again with the interest we take in it. The same argument might
be applied to shew that the poet and painter of imagination are superior
to the mere philosopher or man of science, because they exercise the
powers of reason and intellect combined with nature and passion. They
treat of the highest categories of the human soul, pleasure and pain.

From the foregoing train of reasoning, we may easily account for the too
great tendency of art to run into pedantry and affectation. There is ‘a
pleasure in art which none but artists feel.’ They see beauty where
others see nothing of the sort, in wrinkles, deformity, and old age.
They see it in Titian’s Schoolmaster as well as in Raphael’s Galatea; in
the dark shadows of Rembrandt as well as in the splendid colours of
Rubens; in an angel’s or in a butterfly’s wings. They see with different
eyes from the multitude. But true genius, though it has new sources of
pleasure opened to it, does not lose its sympathy with humanity. It
combines truth of imitation with effect, the parts with the whole, the
means with the end. The mechanic artist sees only that which nobody else
sees, and is conversant only with the technical language and
difficulties of his art. A painter, if shewn a picture, will generally
dwell upon the academic skill displayed in it, and the knowledge of the
received rules of composition. A musician, if asked to play a tune, will
select that which is the most difficult and the least intelligible. The
poet will be struck with the harmony of versification, or the
elaborateness of the arrangement in a composition. The conceits in
Shakspeare were his greatest delight; and improving upon this perverse
method of judging, the German writers, Goethe and Schiller, look upon
Werter and The Robbers as the worst of all their works, because they are
the most popular. Some artists among ourselves have carried the same
principle to a singular excess.[51] If professors themselves are liable
to this kind of pedantry, connoisseurs and dilettanti, who have less
sensibility and more affectation, are almost wholly swayed by it. They
see nothing in a picture but the execution. They are proud of their
knowledge in proportion as it is a secret. The worst judges of pictures
in the United Kingdom are, first, picture-dealers; next, perhaps, the
Directors of the British Institution; and after them, in all
probability, the Members of the Royal Academy.

                                                                   T. T.


 NO. 21.]                      ON _GUSTO_                 [MAY 26, 1816.

Gusto in art is power or passion defining any object. It is not so
difficult to explain this term in what relates to expression (of which
it may be said to be the highest degree) as in what relates to things
without expression, to the natural appearances of objects, as mere
colour or form. In one sense, however, there is hardly any object
entirely devoid of expression, without some character of power belonging
to it, some precise association with pleasure or pain: and it is in
giving this truth of character from the truth of feeling, whether in the
highest or the lowest degree, but always in the highest degree of which
the subject is capable, that gusto consists.

There is a gusto in the colouring of Titian. Not only do his heads seem
to think—his bodies seem to feel. This is what the Italians mean by the
_morbidezza_ of his flesh-colour. It seems sensitive and alive all over;
not merely to have the look and texture of flesh, but the feeling in
itself. For example, the limbs of his female figures have a luxurious
softness and delicacy, which appears conscious of the pleasure of the
beholder. As the objects themselves in nature would produce an
impression on the sense, distinct from every other object, and having
something divine in it, which the heart owns and the imagination
consecrates, the objects in the picture preserve the same impression,
absolute, unimpaired, stamped with all the truth of passion, the pride
of the eye, and the charm of beauty. Rubens makes his flesh-colour like
flowers; Albano’s is like ivory; Titian’s is like flesh, and like
nothing else. It is as different from that of other painters, as the
skin is from a piece of white or red drapery thrown over it. The blood
circulates here and there, the blue veins just appear, the rest is
distinguished throughout only by that sort of tingling sensation to the
eye, which the body feels within itself. This is gusto. Vandyke’s
flesh-colour, though it has great truth and purity, wants gusto. It has
not the internal character, the living principle in it. It is a smooth
surface, not a warm, moving mass. It is painted without passion, with
indifference. The hand only has been concerned. The impression slides
off from the eye, and does not, like the tones of Titian’s pencil, leave
a sting behind it in the mind of the spectator. The eye does not acquire
a taste or appetite for what it sees. In a word, gusto in painting is
where the impression made on one sense excites by affinity those of
another.

Michael Angelo’s forms are full of gusto. They everywhere obtrude the
sense of power upon the eye. His limbs convey an idea of muscular
strength, of moral grandeur, and even of intellectual dignity: they are
firm, commanding, broad, and massy, capable of executing with ease the
determined purposes of the will. His faces have no other expression than
his figures, conscious power and capacity. They appear only to think
what they shall do, and to know that they can do it. This is what is
meant by saying that his style is hard and masculine. It is the reverse
of Correggio’s, which is effeminate. That is, the gusto of Michael
Angelo consists in expressing energy of will without proportionable
sensibility, Correggio’s in expressing exquisite sensibility without
energy of will. In Correggio’s faces as well as figures we see neither
bones nor muscles, but then what a soul is there, full of sweetness and
of grace—pure, playful, soft, angelical! There is sentiment enough in a
hand painted by Correggio to set up a school of history painters.
Whenever we look at the hands of Correggio’s women or of Raphael’s, we
always wish to touch them.

Again, Titian’s landscapes have a prodigious gusto, both in the
colouring and forms. We shall never forget one that we saw many years
ago in the Orleans Gallery of Acteon hunting. It had a brown, mellow,
autumnal look. The sky was of the colour of stone. The winds seemed to
sing through the rustling branches of the trees, and already you might
hear the twanging of bows resound through the tangled mazes of the wood.
Mr. West, we understand, has this landscape. He will know if this
description of it is just. The landscape back-ground of the St. Peter
Martyr is another well known instance of the power of this great painter
to give a romantic interest and an appropriate character to the objects
of his pencil, where every circumstance adds to the effect of the
scene,—the bold trunks of the tall forest trees, the trailing ground
plants, with that tall convent spire rising in the distance, amidst the
blue sapphire mountains and the golden sky.

Rubens has a great deal of gusto in his Fauns and Satyrs, and in all
that expresses motion, but in nothing else. Rembrandt has it in
everything; everything in his pictures has a tangible character. If he
puts a diamond in the ear of a burgomaster’s wife, it is of the first
water; and his furs and stuffs are proof against a Russian winter.
Raphael’s gusto was only in expression; he had no idea of the character
of anything but the human form. The dryness and poverty of his style in
other respects is a phenomenon in the art. His trees are like sprigs of
grass stuck in a book of botanical specimens. Was it that Raphael never
had time to go beyond the walls of Rome? That he was always in the
streets, at church, or in the bath? He was not one of the Society of
Arcadians.[52]

Claude’s landscapes, perfect as they are, want gusto. This is not easy
to explain. They are perfect abstractions of the visible images of
things; they speak the visible language of nature truly. They resemble a
mirror or a microscope. To the eye only they are more perfect than any
other landscapes that ever were or will be painted; they give more of
nature, as cognisable by one sense alone; but they lay an equal stress
on all visible impressions. They do not interpret one sense by another;
they do not distinguish the character of different objects as we are
taught, and can only be taught, to distinguish them by their effect on
the different senses. That is, his eye wanted imagination: it did not
strongly sympathise with his other faculties. He saw the atmosphere, but
he did not feel it. He painted the trunk of a tree or a rock in the
foreground as smooth—with as complete an abstraction of the gross,
tangible impression, as any other part of the picture. His trees are
perfectly beautiful, but quite immovable; they have a look of
enchantment. In short, his landscapes are unequalled imitations of
nature, released from its subjection to the elements, as if all objects
were become a delightful fairy vision, and the eye had rarefied and
refined away the other senses.

The gusto in the Greek statues is of a very singular kind. The sense of
perfect form nearly occupies the whole mind, and hardly suffers it to
dwell on any other feeling. It seems enough for them _to be_, without
acting or suffering. Their forms are ideal, spiritual. Their beauty is
power. By their beauty they are raised above the frailties of pain or
passion; by their beauty they are deified.

The infinite quantity of dramatic invention in Shakspeare takes from his
gusto. The power he delights to show is not intense, but discursive. He
never insists on anything as much as he might, except a quibble. Milton
has great gusto. He repeats his blows twice; grapples with and exhausts
his subject. His imagination has a double relish of its objects, an
inveterate attachment to the things he describes, and to the words
describing them.

                           ——‘Or where Chineses drive
           With sails and wind their _cany_ waggons _light_.’

                  .       .       .       .       .

           ‘Wild above rule or art, _enormous_ bliss.’

There is a gusto in Pope’s compliments, in Dryden’s satires, and Prior’s
tales; and among prose writers Boccacio and Rabelais had the most of it.
We will only mention one other work which appears to us to be full of
gusto, and that is the _Beggar’s Opera_. If it is not, we are altogether
mistaken in our notions on this delicate subject.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 22.]                      ON PEDANTRY               [MARCH 3, 1816.

The power of attaching an interest to the most trifling or painful
pursuits, in which our whole attention and faculties are engaged, is one
of the greatest happinesses of our nature. The common soldier mounts the
breach with joy; the miser deliberately starves himself to death; the
mathematician sets about extracting the cube-root with a feeling of
enthusiasm; and the lawyer sheds tears of admiration over Coke upon
Littleton. It is the same through human life. He who is not in some
measure a pedant, though he may be a wise, cannot be a very happy man.

The chief charm of reading the old novels is from the picture they give
of the egotism of the characters, the importance of each individual to
himself, and his fancied superiority over every one else. We like, for
instance, the pedantry of Parson Adams, who thought a schoolmaster the
greatest character in the world, and that he was the greatest
schoolmaster in it. We do not see any equivalent for the satisfaction
which this conviction must have afforded him in the most nicely
graduated scale of talents and accomplishments to which he was an utter
stranger. When the old-fashioned Scotch pedagogue turns Roderick Random
round and round, and surveys him from head to foot with such infinite
surprise and laughter, at the same time breaking out himself into
gestures and exclamations still more uncouth and ridiculous, who would
wish to have deprived him of this burst of extravagant self-complacency?
When our follies afford equal delight to ourselves and those about us,
what is there to be desired more? We cannot discover the vast advantage
of ‘seeing ourselves as others see us.’ It is better to have a contempt
for any one than for ourselves!

One of the most constant butts of ridicule, both in the old comedies and
novels, is the professional jargon of the medical tribe. Yet it cannot
be denied that this jargon, however affected it may seem, is the natural
language of apothecaries and physicians, the mother-tongue of pharmacy!
It is that by which their knowledge first comes to them, that with which
they have the most obstinate associations, that in which they can
express themselves the most readily and with the best effect upon their
hearers; and though there may be some assumption of superiority in all
this, yet it is only by an effort of circumlocution that they could
condescend to explain themselves in ordinary language. Besides, there is
a delicacy at bottom; as it is the only language in which a nauseous
medicine can be decorously administered, or a limb taken off with the
proper degree of secrecy. If the most blundering coxcombs affect this
language most, what does it signify, while they retain the same
dignified notions of themselves and their art, and are equally happy in
their knowledge or their ignorance? The ignorant and pretending
physician is a capital character in Moliere: and, indeed, throughout his
whole plays the great source of the comic interest is in the fantastic
exaggeration of blind self-love, in letting loose the habitual
peculiarities of each individual from all restraint of conscious
observation or self-knowledge, in giving way to that specific levity of
impulse which mounts at once to the height of absurdity, in spite of the
obstacles that surround it, as a fluid in a barometer rises according to
the pressure of the external air! His characters are almost always
pedantic, and yet the most unconscious of all others. Take, for example,
those two worthy gentlemen, Monsieur Jourdain and Monsieur
Pourceaugnac.[53]

Learning and pedantry were formerly synonymous; and it was well when
they were so. Can there be a higher satisfaction than for a man to
understand Greek, and to believe that there is nothing else worth
understanding? Learning is the knowledge of that which is not generally
known. What an ease and a dignity in pretensions, founded on the
ignorance of others! What a pleasure in wondering, what a pride in being
wondered at! In the library of the family where we were brought up,
stood the _Fratres Poloni_; and we can never forget or describe the
feeling with which not only their appearance, but the names of the
authors on the outside inspired us. Pripscovius, we remember, was one of
the easiest to pronounce. The gravity of the contents seemed in
proportion to the weight of the volumes; the importance of the subjects
increased with our ignorance of them. The trivialness of the remarks, if
ever we looked into them,—the repetitions, the monotony, only gave a
greater solemnity to the whole, as the slowness and minuteness of the
evidence adds to the impressiveness of a judicial proceeding. We knew
that the authors had devoted their whole lives to the production of
these works, carefully abstaining from the introduction of any thing
amusing or lively or interesting. In ten folio volumes there was not one
sally of wit, one striking reflection. What, then, must have been their
sense of the importance of the subject, the profound stores of knowledge
which they had to communicate! ‘From all this world’s encumbrance they
did themselves assoil.’ Such was the notion we then had of this learned
lumber; yet we would rather have this feeling again for one half-hour
than be possessed of all the acuteness of Bayle or the wit of Voltaire!

It may be considered as a sign of the decay of piety and learning in
modern times, that our divines no longer introduce texts of the original
Scriptures into their sermons. The very sound of the original Greek or
Hebrew would impress the hearer with a more lively faith in the sacred
writers than any translation, however literal or correct. It may be even
doubted whether the translation of the Scriptures into the vulgar tongue
was any advantage to the people. The mystery in which particular points
of faith were left involved, gave an awe and sacredness to religious
opinions: the general purport of the truths and promises of revelation
was made known by other means; and nothing beyond this general and
implicit conviction can be obtained, where all is undefined and
infinite.

Again, it may be questioned whether, in matters of mere human reasoning,
much has been gained by the disuse of the learned languages. Sir Isaac
Newton wrote in Latin; and it is perhaps one of Bacon’s fopperies that
he translated his works into English. If certain follies have been
exposed by being stripped of their formal disguise, others have had a
greater chance of succeeding, by being presented in a more pleasing and
popular shape. This has been remarkably the case in France, (the least
pedantic country in the world), where the women mingle with everything,
even with metaphysics, and where all philosophy is reduced to a set of
phrases for the toilette. When books are written in the prevailing
language of the country, every one becomes a critic who can read. An
author is no longer tried by his peers. A species of universal suffrage
is introduced in letters, which is only applicable to politics. The good
old Latin style of our forefathers, if it concealed the dullness of the
writer, at least was a barrier against the impertinence, flippancy, and
ignorance of the reader. However, the immediate transition from the
pedantic to the popular style in literature was a change that must have
been very delightful at the time. Our illustrious predecessors, the
_Tatler_ and _Spectator_, were very happily off in this respect. They
wore the public favour in its newest gloss, before it had become
tarnished and common—before familiarity had bred contempt. It was the
honey-moon of authorship. Their Essays were among the first instances in
this country of learning sacrificing to the graces, and of a mutual
understanding and good-humoured equality between the writer and the
reader. This new style of composition, to use the phraseology of Mr.
Burke, ‘mitigated authors into companions, and compelled wisdom to
submit to the soft collar of social esteem.’ The original papers of the
_Tatler_, printed on a half sheet of common foolscap, were regularly
served up at breakfast-time with the silver tea-kettle and thin slices
of bread and butter; and what the ingenious Mr. Bickerstaff wrote
overnight in his easy chair, he might flatter himself would be read the
next morning with elegant applause by the fair, the witty, the learned,
and the great, in all parts of this kingdom, in which civilisation had
made any considerable advances. The perfection of letters is when the
highest ambition of the writer is to please his readers, and the
greatest pride of the reader is to understand his author. The
satisfaction on both sides ceases when the town becomes a club of
authors, when each man stands with his manuscript in his hand waiting
for his turn of applause, and when the claims on our admiration are so
many, that, like those of common beggars, to prevent imposition they can
only be answered with general neglect. Our self-love would be quite
bankrupt, if critics by profession did not come forward as beadles to
keep off the crowd, and to relieve us from the importunity of these
innumerable candidates for fame, by pointing out their faults and
passing over their beauties. In the more auspicious period just alluded
to an author was regarded by the better sort as a man of genius, and by
the vulgar, as a kind of prodigy; insomuch that the Spectator was
obliged to shorten his residence at his friend Sir Roger de Coverley’s,
from his being taken for a conjuror. Every state of society has its
advantages and disadvantages. An author is at present in no danger of
being taken for a conjuror!


 NO. 23.]              THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED       [MARCH 10, 1816.

Life is the art of being well deceived; and in order that the deception
may succeed, it must be habitual and uninterrupted. A constant
examination of the value of our opinions and enjoyments, compared with
those of others, may lessen our prejudices, but will leave nothing for
our affections to rest upon. A multiplicity of objects unsettles the
mind, and destroys not only all enthusiasm, but all sincerity of
attachment, all constancy of pursuit; as persons accustomed to an
itinerant mode of life never feel themselves at home in any place. It is
by means of habit that our intellectual employments mix like our food
with the circulation of the blood, and go on like any other part of the
animal functions. To take away the force of habit and prejudice
entirely, is to strike at the root of our personal existence. The
book-worm, buried in the depth of his researches, may well say to the
obtrusive shifting realities of the world, ‘Leave me to my repose!’ We
have seen an instance of a poetical enthusiast, who would have passed
his life very comfortably in the contemplation of _his own idea_, if he
had not been disturbed in his reverie by the Reviewers; and for our own
parts, we think we could pass our lives very learnedly and classically
in one of the quadrangles at Oxford, without any idea at all, vegetating
merely on the air of the place. Chaucer has drawn a beautiful picture of
a true scholar in his Clerk of Oxenford:

            ‘A Clerk ther was of Oxenforde also,
            That unto logik, hadde longe ygo.
            As lene was his hors as is a rake,
            And he was not right fat, I undertake;
            But loked holwe, and thereto soberly.
            Ful thredbare was his overest courtepy,
            For he hadde geten him yit no benefice,
            Ne was nought worldly to have an office.
            For him was lever have at his beddes hed
            A twenty bokes, clothed in blak or red,
            Of Aristotle and his philosophie,
            Then robes riche, or fidel, or sautrie.
            But all be that he was a philosophre,
            Yet hadde he but litel gold in cofre,
            But al that he might of his frendes hente,
            On bokes and on lerning he it spente,
            And besily gan for the soules praie
            Of hem, that gave him wherwith to scolaie.
            Of studie toke he moste care and hede.
            Not a word spake he more than was nede;
            And that was said in forme and reverence,
            And short, and quike, and full of high sentence.
            Sowning in moral vertue was his speche,
            And gladly wolde he lerne, and gladly teche.’

If letters have profited little by throwing down the barrier between
learned prejudice and ignorant presumption, the arts have profited still
less by the universal diffusion of accomplishment and pretension. An
artist is no longer looked upon as any thing, who is not at the same
time ‘chemist, statesman, fiddler, and buffoon.’ It is expected of him
that he should be well-dressed, and he is poor; that he should move
gracefully, and he has never learned to dance; that he should converse
on all subjects, and he understands but one; that he should be read in
different languages, and he only knows his own. Yet there is one
language, the language of Nature, in which it is enough for him to be
able to read, to find everlasting employment and solace to his thoughts—

          ‘Tongues in the trees, books in the running brooks,
          Sermons in stones, and good in every thing.’

He will find no end of his labours or of his triumphs there; yet still
feel all his strength not more than equal to the task he has begun—his
whole life too short for art. Rubens complained, that just as he was
beginning to understand his profession, he was forced to quit it. It was
a saying of Michael Angelo, that ‘painting was jealous, and required the
whole man to herself.’ Is it to be supposed that Rembrandt did not find
sufficient resources against the spleen in the little cell, where
mystery and silence hung upon his pencil, or the noon-tide ray
penetrated the solemn gloom around him, without the aid of modern
newspapers, novels, and reviews? Was he not more wisely employed, while
devoted solely to his art—married to that immortal bride! We do not
imagine Sir Joshua Reynolds was much happier for having written his
lectures, nor for the learned society he kept, friendship apart; and
learned society is not necessary to friendship. He was evidently, as far
as conversation was concerned, little at his ease in it; and he was
always glad, as he himself said, after he had been entertained at the
houses of the great, to get back to his painting-room again. Any one
settled pursuit, together with the ordinary alternations of leisure,
exercise, and amusement, and the natural feelings and relations of
society, is quite enough to take up the whole of our thoughts, time, and
affections; and any thing beyond this will, generally speaking, only
tend to dissipate and distract the mind. There is no end of
accomplishments, of the prospect of new acquisitions of taste or skill,
or of the uneasiness arising from the want of them, if we once indulge
in this idle habit of vanity and affectation. The mind is never
satisfied with what it is, but is always looking out for fanciful
perfections, which it can neither attain nor practise. Our failure in
any one object is fatal to our enjoyment of all the rest; and the
chances of disappointment multiply with the number of our pursuits. In
catching at the shadow, we lose the substance. No man can thoroughly
master more than one art or science. The world has never seen a perfect
painter. What would it have availed for Raphael to have aimed at
Titian’s colouring, or for Titian to have imitated Raphael’s drawing,
but to have diverted each from the true bent of his natural genius, and
to have made each sensible of his own deficiencies, without any
probability of supplying them? Pedantry in art, in learning, in every
thing, is the setting an extraordinary value on that which we can do,
and that which we understand best, and which it is our business to do
and understand. Where is the harm of this? To possess or even understand
all kinds of excellence equally, is impossible; and to pretend to admire
that to which we are indifferent, as much as that which is of the
greatest use, and which gives the greatest pleasure to us, is not
liberality, but affectation. Is an artist, for instance, to be required
to feel the same admiration for the works of Handel as for those of
Raphael? If he is sincere, he cannot: and a man, to be free from
pedantry, must be either a coxcomb or a hypocrite. Vestris was so far in
the right, in saying that Voltaire and he were the two greatest men in
Europe. Voltaire was so in the public opinion, and he was so in his own.
Authors and literary people have been unjustly accused for arrogating an
exclusive preference to letters over other arts. They are justified in
doing this, because words are the most natural and universal language,
and because they have the sympathy of the world with them. Poets, for
the same reason, have a right to be the vainest of authors. The
prejudice attached to established reputation is, in like manner,
perfectly well founded, because that which has longest excited our
admiration and the admiration of mankind, is most entitled to
admiration, on the score of habit, sympathy, and deference to public
opinion. There is a sentiment attached to classical reputation, which
cannot belong to new works of genius, till they become old in their
turn.

There appears to be a natural division of labour in the ornamental as
well as the mechanical arts of human life. We do not see why a nobleman
should wish to shine as a poet, any more than to be dubbed a knight, or
to be created Lord Mayor of London. If he succeeds, he gains nothing;
and then if he is damned, what a ridiculous figure he makes! The great,
instead of rivalling them, should keep authors, as they formerly kept
fools,—a practice in itself highly laudable, and the disuse of which
might be referred to as the first symptom of the degeneracy of modern
times, and dissolution of the principles of social order! But of all the
instances of a profession now unjustly obsolete, commend us to the
alchemist. We see him sitting fortified in his prejudices, with his
furnace, his diagrams, and his alembics; smiling at disappointments as
proofs of the sublimity of his art, and the earnest of his future
success: wondering at his own knowledge and the incredulity of others;
fed with hope to the last gasp, and having all the pleasures without the
pain of madness. What is there in the discoveries of modern chemistry
equal to the very names of the ELIXIR VITÆ and the AURUM POTABILE!

In _Froissard’s Chronicles_ there is an account of a reverend Monk who
had been a robber in the early part of his life, and who, when he grew
old, used feelingly to lament that he had ever changed his profession.
He said, ‘It was a goodly sight to sally out from his castle, and to see
a troop of jolly friars coming riding that way, with their mules well
laden with viands and rich stores, to advance towards them, to attack
and overthrow them, returning to the castle with a noble booty.’ He
preferred this mode of life to counting his beads and chaunting his
vespers, and repented that he had ever been prevailed on to relinquish
so laudable a calling. In this confession of remorse, we may be sure
that there was no hypocrisy.

The difference in the character of the gentlemen of the present age and
those of the old school, has been often insisted on. The character of a
gentleman is a _relative term_, which can hardly subsist where there is
no marked distinction of persons. The diffusion of knowledge, of
artificial and intellectual equality, tends to level this distinction,
and to confound that nice perception and high sense of honour, which
arises from conspicuousness of situation, and a perpetual attention to
personal propriety and the claims of personal respect. The age of
chivalry is gone with the improvements in the art of war, which
superseded the exercise of personal courage; and the character of a
gentleman must disappear with those general refinements in manners,
which render the advantages of rank and situation accessible almost to
every one. The bag-wig and sword naturally followed the fate of the
helmet and the spear, when these outward insignia no longer implied
acknowledged superiority, and were a distinction without a difference.

The spirit of chivalrous and romantic love proceeded on the same
exclusive principle. It was an enthusiastic adoration, an idolatrous
worship paid to sex and beauty. This, even in its blindest excess, was
better than the cold indifference and prostituted gallantry of this
philosophic age. The extreme tendency of civilisation is to dissipate
all intellectual energy, and dissolve all moral principle. We are
sometimes inclined to regret the innovations on the Catholic religion.
It was a noble charter for ignorance, dullness, and prejudice of all
kinds, (perhaps, after all, ‘the sovereign’st things on earth’), and put
an effectual stop to the vanity and restlessness of opinion. ‘It wrapped
the human understanding all round like a blanket.’ Since the
Reformation, altars, unsprinkled by holy oil, are no longer sacred; and
thrones, unsupported by the divine right, have become uneasy and
insecure.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 24.]             ON THE CHARACTER OF ROUSSEAU      [APRIL 14, 1816.

Madame de Stael, in her Letters on the Writings and Character of
Rousseau, gives it as her opinion, ‘that the imagination was the first
faculty of his mind, and that this faculty even absorbed all the
others.’[54] And she farther adds, ‘Rousseau had great strength of
reason on abstract questions, or with respect to objects, which have no
reality but in the mind.’[55] Both these opinions are radically wrong.
Neither imagination nor reason can properly be said to have been the
original predominant faculties of his mind. The strength both of
imagination and reason, which he possessed, was borrowed from the excess
of another faculty; and the weakness and poverty of reason and
imagination, which are to be found in his works, may be traced to the
same source, namely, that these faculties in him were artificial,
secondary, and dependant, operating by a power not theirs, but lent to
them. The only quality which he possessed in an eminent degree, which
alone raised him above ordinary men, and which gave to his writings and
opinions an influence greater, perhaps, than has been exerted by any
individual in modern times, was extreme sensibility, or an acute and
even morbid feeling of all that related to his own impressions, to the
objects and events of his life. He had the most intense consciousness of
his own existence. No object that had once made an impression on him was
ever after effaced. Every feeling in his mind became a passion. His
craving after excitement was an appetite and a disease. His interest in
his own thoughts and feelings was always wound up to the highest pitch;
and hence the enthusiasm which he excited in others. He owed the power
which he exercised over the opinions of all Europe, by which he created
numberless disciples, and overturned established systems, to the tyranny
which his feelings, in the first instance, exercised over himself. The
dazzling blaze of his reputation was kindled by the same fire that fed
upon his vitals.[56] His ideas differed from those of other men only in
their force and intensity. His genius was the effect of his temperament.
He created nothing, he demonstrated nothing, by a pure effort of the
understanding. His fictitious characters are modifications of his own
being, reflections and shadows of himself. His speculations are the
obvious exaggerations of a mind, giving a loose to its habitual
impulses, and moulding all nature to its own purposes. Hence his
enthusiasm and his eloquence, bearing down all opposition. Hence the
warmth and the luxuriance, as well as the sameness of his descriptions.
Hence the frequent verboseness of his style; for passion lends force and
reality to language, and makes words supply the place of imagination.
Hence the tenaciousness of his logic, the acuteness of his observations,
the refinement and the inconsistency of his reasoning. Hence his keen
penetration, and his strange want of comprehension of mind: for the same
intense feeling which enabled him to discern the first principles of
things, and seize some one view of a subject in all its ramifications,
prevented him from admitting the operation of other causes which
interfered with his favourite purpose, and involved him in endless
wilful contradictions. Hence his excessive egotism, which filled all
objects with himself, and would have occupied the universe with his
smallest interest. Hence his jealousy and suspicion of others; for no
attention, no respect or sympathy, could come up to the extravagant
claims of his self-love. Hence his dissatisfaction with himself and with
all around him; for nothing could satisfy his ardent longings after
good, his restless appetite of being. Hence his feelings, overstrained
and exhausted, recoiled upon themselves, and produced his love of
silence and repose, his feverish aspirations after the quiet and
solitude of nature. Hence in part also his quarrel with the artificial
institutions and distinctions of society, which opposed so many barriers
to the unrestrained indulgence of his will, and allured his imagination
to scenes of pastoral simplicity or of savage life, where the passions
were either not excited or left to follow their own impulse,—where the
petty vexations and irritating disappointments of common life had no
place,—and where the tormenting pursuits of arts and sciences were lost
in pure animal enjoyment, or indolent repose. Thus he describes the
first savage wandering for ever under the shade of magnificent forests,
or by the side of mighty rivers, smit with the unquenchable love of
nature!

The best of all his works is the _Confessions_, though it is that which
has been least read, because it contains the fewest set paradoxes or
general opinions. It relates entirely to himself; and no one was ever so
much at home on this subject as he was. From the strong hold which they
had taken of his mind, he makes us enter into his feelings as if they
had been our own, and we seem to remember every incident and
circumstance of his life as if it had happened to ourselves. We are
never tired of this work, for it everywhere presents us with pictures
which we can fancy to be counterparts of our own existence. The passages
of this sort are innumerable. There is the interesting account of his
childhood, the constraints and thoughtless liberty of which are so well
described; of his sitting up all night reading romances with his father,
till they were forced to desist by hearing the swallows twittering in
their nests; his crossing the Alps, described with all the feelings
belonging to it, his pleasure in setting out, his satisfaction in coming
to his journey’s end, the delight of ‘coming and going he knew not
where’; his arriving at Turin; the figure of Madame Basile, drawn with
such inimitable precision and elegance; the delightful adventure of the
Chateau de Toune, where he passed the day with Mademoiselle G**** and
Mademoiselle Galley; the story of his Zulietta, the proud, the charming
Zulietta, whose last words, ‘_Va Zanetto, e studia la Matematica_,’ were
never to be forgotten; his sleeping near Lyons in a niche of the wall,
after a fine summer’s day, with a nightingale perched above his head;
his first meeting with Madame Warens, the pomp of sound with which he
has celebrated her name, beginning ‘_Louise Eleonore de Warens étoit une
demoiselle de la Tour de Pil, noble et ancienne famille de Vevai, ville
du pays de Vaud_’ (sounds which we still tremble to repeat); his
description of her person, her angelic smile, her mouth of the size of
his own; his walking out one day while the bells were chiming to
vespers, and anticipating in a sort of waking dream the life he
afterwards led with her, in which months and years, and life itself
passed away in undisturbed felicity; the sudden disappointment of his
hopes; his transport thirty years after at seeing the same flower which
they had brought home together from one of their rambles near Chambery;
his thoughts in that long interval of time; his suppers with Grimm and
Diderot after he came to Paris; the first idea of his prize dissertation
on the savage state; his account of writing the _New Eloise_, and his
attachment to Madame d’Houdetot; his literary projects, his fame, his
misfortunes, his unhappy temper; his last solitary retirement in the
lake and island of Bienne, with his dog and his boat; his reveries and
delicious musings there; all these crowd into our minds with
recollections which we do not chuse to express. There are no passages in
the _New Eloise_ of equal force and beauty with the best descriptions in
the _Confessions_, if we except the excursion on the water, Julia’s last
letter to St. Preux, and his letter to her, recalling the days of their
first loves. We spent two whole years in reading these two works; and
(gentle reader, it was when we were young) in shedding tears over them

                      ——‘As fast as the Arabian trees
                  Their medicinal gums.’

They were the happiest years of our life. We may well say of them, sweet
is the dew of their memory, and pleasant the balm of their recollection!
There are, indeed, impressions which neither time nor circumstances can
efface.[57]

Rousseau, in all his writings, never once lost sight of himself. He was
the same individual from first to last. The spring that moved his
passions never went down, the pulse that agitated his heart never ceased
to beat. It was this strong feeling of interest, accumulating in his
mind, which overpowers and absorbs the feelings of his readers. He owed
all his power to sentiment. The writer who most nearly resembles him in
our own times is the author of the _Lyrical Ballads_. We see no other
difference between them, than that the one wrote in prose and the other
in poetry; and that prose is perhaps better adapted to express those
local and personal feelings, which are inveterate habits in the mind,
than poetry, which embodies its imaginary creations. We conceive that
Rousseau’s exclamation, ‘_Ah, voila de la pervenche_,’ comes more home
to the mind than Mr. Wordsworth’s discovery of the linnet’s nest ‘with
five blue eggs,’ or than his address to the cuckoo, beautiful as we
think it is; and we will confidently match the Citizen of Geneva’s
adventures on the Lake of Bienne against the Cumberland Poet’s floating
dreams on the Lake of Grasmere. Both create an interest out of nothing,
or rather out of their own feelings; both weave numberless recollections
into one sentiment; both wind their own being round whatever object
occurs to them. But Rousseau, as a prose-writer, gives only the habitual
and personal impression. Mr. Wordsworth, as a poet, is forced to lend
the colours of imagination to impressions which owe all their force to
their identity with themselves, and tries to paint what is only to be
felt. Rousseau, in a word, interests you in certain objects by
interesting you in himself: Mr. Wordsworth would persuade you that the
most insignificant objects are interesting in themselves, because he is
interested in them. If he had met with Rousseau’s favourite periwinkle,
he would have _translated_ it into the most beautiful of flowers. This
is not imagination, but want of sense. If his jealousy of the sympathy
of others makes him avoid what is beautiful and grand in nature, why
does he undertake elaborately to describe other objects? _His_ nature is
a mere Dulcinea del Toboso, and he would make a Vashti of her. Rubens
appears to have been as extravagantly attached to his three wives, as
Raphael was to his Fornarina; but their faces were not so classical. The
three greatest egotists that we know of, that is, the three writers who
felt their own being most powerfully and exclusively, are Rousseau,
Wordsworth, and Benvenuto Cellini. As Swift somewhere says, we defy the
world to furnish out a fourth.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 25.]              ON DIFFERENT SORTS OF FAME       [APRIL 21, 1816.

There is a half serious, half ironical argument in Melmoth’s
_Fitz-Osborn’s Letters_, to shew the futility of posthumous fame, which
runs thus: ‘The object of any one who is inspired with this passion is
to be remembered by posterity with admiration and delight, as having
been possessed of certain powers and excellences which distinguished him
above his contemporaries. But posterity, it is said, can know nothing of
the individual but from the memory of these qualities which he has left
behind him. All that we know of Julius Cæsar, for instance, is that he
was the person who performed certain actions, and wrote a book called
his _Commentaries_. When, therefore, we extol Julius Cæsar for his
actions or his writings, what do we say but that the person who
performed certain things did perform them; that the author of such a
work was the person who wrote it; or, in short, that Julius Cæsar was
Julius Cæsar? Now this is a mere truism, and the desire to be the
subject of such an identical proposition must, therefore, be an evident
absurdity.’ The sophism is a tolerably ingenious one, but it is a
sophism, nevertheless. It would go equally to prove the nullity, not
only of posthumous fame, but of living reputation; for the good or the
bad opinion which my next-door neighbour may entertain of me is nothing
more than his conviction that such and such a person having certain good
or bad qualities is possessed of them; nor is the figure, which a
Lord-Mayor elect, a prating demagogue, or popular preacher, makes in the
eyes of the admiring multitude—_himself_, but an image of him reflected
in the minds of others, in connection with certain feelings of respect
and wonder. In fact, whether the admiration we seek is to last for a day
or for eternity, whether we are to have it while living or after we are
dead, whether it is to be expressed by our contemporaries or by future
generations, the principle of it is the same—_sympathy with the feelings
of others_, and the necessary tendency which the idea or consciousness
of the approbation of others has to strengthen the suggestions of our
self-love.[58] We are all inclined to think well of ourselves, of our
sense and capacity in whatever we undertake; but from this very desire
to think well of ourselves, we are (as _Mrs. Peachum_ says) ‘_bitter_
bad judges’ of our own pretensions; and when our vanity flatters us
most, we ought in general to suspect it most. We are, therefore, glad to
get the good opinion of a friend, but that may be partial; the good word
of a stranger is likely to be more sincere, but he may be a blockhead;
the multitude will agree with us, if we agree with them; accident, the
caprice of fashion, the prejudice of the moment, may give a fleeting
reputation; our only certain appeal, therefore, is to posterity; the
voice of fame is alone the voice of truth. In proportion, however, as
this award is final and secure, it is remote and uncertain. Voltaire
said to some one, who had addressed an Epistle to Posterity, ‘I am
afraid, my friend, this letter will never be delivered according to its
direction.’ It can exist only in imagination; and we can only presume
upon our claim to it, as we prefer the hope of lasting fame to every
thing else. The love of fame is almost another name for the love of
excellence; or it is the ambition to attain the highest excellence,
sanctioned by the highest authority, that of time. Vanity, and the love
of fame, are quite distinct from each other; for the one is voracious of
the most obvious and doubtful applause, whereas the other rejects or
overlooks every kind of applause but that which is purified from every
mixture of flattery, and identified with truth and nature itself. There
is, therefore, something disinterested in this passion, inasmuch as it
is abstracted and ideal, and only appeals to opinion as a standard of
truth; it is this which ‘makes ambition virtue.’ Milton had as fine an
idea as any one of true fame; and Dr. Johnson has very beautifully
described his patient and confident anticipations of the success of his
great poem in the account of _Paradise Lost_. He has, indeed, done the
same thing himself in _Lycidas_:

           ‘Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise
           (That last infirmity of noble mind)
           To scorn delights, and live laborious days;
           But the fair Guerdon when we hope to find,
           And think to burst out into sudden blaze,
           Comes the blind Fury with th’ abhorred shears,
           And slits the thin-spun life. But not the praise,
           Phœbus replied, and touch’d my trembling ears.’

None but those who have sterling pretensions can afford to refer them to
time; as persons who live upon their means cannot well go into Chancery.
No feeling can be more at variance with the true love of fame than that
impatience which we have sometimes witnessed to ‘pluck its fruits,
unripe and crude,’ before the time, to make a little echo of popularity
mimic the voice of fame, and to convert a prize-medal or a
newspaper-puff into a passport to immortality.

When we hear any one complaining that he has not the same fame as some
poet or painter who lived two hundred years ago, he seems to us to
complain that he has not been dead these two hundred years. When his
fame has undergone the same ordeal, that is, has lasted as long, it will
be as good, if he really deserves it. We think it equally absurd, when
we sometimes find people objecting, that such an acquaintance of theirs,
who has not an idea in his head, should be so much better off in the
world than they are. But it is for this very reason; they have preferred
the indulgence of their ideas to the pursuit of realities. It is but
fair that he who has no ideas should have something in their stead. If
he who has devoted his time to the study of beauty, to the pursuit of
truth, whose object has been to govern opinion, to form the taste of
others, to instruct or to amuse the public, succeeds in this respect, he
has no more right to complain that he has not a title or a fortune, than
he who has not purchased a ticket, that is, who has taken no means to
the end, has a right to complain that he has not a prize in the lottery.

In proportion as men can command the immediate and vulgar applause of
others, they become indifferent to that which is remote and difficult of
attainment. We take pains only when we are compelled to do it. Little
men are remarked to have courage; little women to have wit; and it is
seldom that a man of genius is a coxcomb in his dress. Rich men are
contented not to be thought wise; and the Great often think themselves
well off, if they can escape being the jest of their acquaintance.
Authors were actuated by the desire of the applause of posterity, only
so long as they were debarred of that of their contemporaries, just as
we see the map of the gold-mines of Peru hanging in the room of
Hogarth’s _Distressed Poet_. In the midst of the ignorance and
prejudices with which they were surrounded, they had a sort of _forlorn
hope_ in the prospect of immortality. The spirit of universal criticism
has superseded the anticipation of posthumous fame, and instead of
waiting for the award of distant ages, the poet or prose-writer receives
his final doom from the next number of the _Edinburgh_ or _Quarterly
Review_. According as the nearness of the applause increases, our
impatience increases with it. A writer in a weekly journal engages with
reluctance in a monthly publication: and again, a contributor to a daily
paper sets about his task with greater spirit than either of them. It is
like prompt payment. The effort and the applause go together. We,
indeed, have known a man of genius and eloquence, to whom, from a habit
of excessive talking, the certainty of seeing what he wrote in print the
next day was too remote a stimulus for his imagination, and who
constantly laid aside his pen in the middle of an article, if a friend
dropped in, to finish the subject more effectually aloud, so that the
approbation of his hearer, and the sound of his own voice might be
co-instantaneous. Members of Parliament seldom turn authors, except to
print their speeches when they have not been distinctly heard or
understood; and great orators are generally very indifferent writers,
from want of sufficient inducement to exert themselves, when the
immediate effect on others is not perceived, and the irritation of
applause or opposition ceases.

There have been in the last century two singular examples of literary
reputation, the one of an author without a name, and the other of a name
without an author. We mean the author of _Junius’s Letters_, and the
translator of the mottos to the _Rambler_, whose name was Elphinstone.
The _Rambler_ was published in the year 1750, and the name of
Elphinstone prefixed to each paper is familiar to every literary reader,
since that time, though we know nothing more of him. We saw this
gentleman, since the commencement of the present century, looking over a
clipped hedge in the country, with a broad-flapped hat, a venerable
countenance, and his dress cut out with the same formality as his
ever-greens. His name had not only survived half a century in
conjunction with that of Johnson, but he had survived with it, enjoying
all the dignity of a classical reputation, and the ease of a literary
sinecure, on the strength of his mottos. The author of _Junius’s
Letters_ is, on the contrary, as remarkable an instance of a writer who
has arrived at all the public honours of literature, without being known
by name to a single individual, and who may be said to have realised all
the pleasure of posthumous fame, while living, without the smallest
gratification of personal vanity. An anonymous writer may feel an acute
interest in what is said of his productions, and a secret satisfaction
in their success, because it is not the effect of personal
considerations, as the overhearing any one speak well of us is more
agreeable than a direct compliment. But this very satisfaction will
tempt him to communicate his secret. This temptation, however, does not
extend beyond the circle of his acquaintance. With respect to the
public, who know an author only by his writings, it is of little
consequence whether he has a real or a fictitious name, or a signature,
so that they have some clue by which to associate the works with the
author. In the case of _Junius_, therefore, where other personal
considerations of interest or connections might immediately counteract
and set aside this temptation, the triumph over the mere vanity of
authorship might not have cost him so dear as we are at first inclined
to imagine. Suppose it to have been the old Marquis of ——? It is quite
out of the question that he should keep his places and not keep his
secret. If ever the King should die, we think it not impossible that the
secret may out. Certainly the _accouchement_ of any princess in Europe
would not excite an equal interest. ‘And you, then, Sir, are the author
of _Junius_!’ What a recognition for the public and the author! That
between Yorick and the Frenchman was a trifle to it.

We have said that we think the desire to be known by name as an author
chiefly has a reference to those to whom we are known personally, and is
strongest with regard to those who know most of our persons and least of
our capacities. We wish to _subpœna_ the public to our characters. Those
who, by great services or great meannesses, have attained titles, always
take them from the place with which they have the earliest associations,
and thus strive to throw a veil of importance over the insignificance of
their original pretensions, or the injustice of fortune. When Lord
Nelson was passing over the quay at Yarmouth, to take possession of the
ship to which he had been appointed, the people exclaimed, ‘Why make
that little fellow a captain?’ He thought of this when he fought the
battles of the Nile and Trafalgar. The same sense of personal
insignificance which made him great in action made him a fool in love.
If Bonaparte had been six inches higher, he never would have gone on
that disastrous Russian expedition, nor ‘with that addition’ would he
ever have been Emperor and King. For our own parts, one object which we
have in writing these Essays, is to send them in a volume to a person
who took some notice of us when children, and who augured, perhaps,
better of us than we deserved. In fact, the opinion of those who know us
most, who are a kind of second self in our recollections, is a sort of
second conscience; and the approbation of one or two friends is all the
immortality _we_ pretend to.

                                                                      A.


 NO. 26.]                CHARACTER OF JOHN BULL           [MAY 19, 1816.

In a late number of a respectable publication, there is the following
description of the French character:—

‘Extremes meet. This is the only way of accounting for that enigma, the
French character. It has often been remarked, that this ingenious nation
exhibits more striking contradictions than any other that ever existed.
They are the gayest of the gay, and the gravest of the grave. Their very
faces pass at once from an expression of the most lively animation, when
they are in conversation or in action, to a melancholy blank. They are
the lightest and most volatile, and at the same time the most plodding,
mechanical, and laborious people in Europe. They are one moment the
slaves of the most contemptible prejudices, and the next launch out into
all the extravagance of the most abstract speculations. In matters of
taste they are as inexorable as they are lax in questions of morality;
they judge of the one by rules, of the other by their inclinations. It
seems at times as if nothing could shock them, and yet they are offended
at the merest trifles. The smallest things make the greatest impression
on them. From the facility with which they can accommodate themselves to
circumstances, they have no fixed principles or real character. They are
always that which gives them least pain, or costs them least trouble.
They easily disentangle their thoughts from whatever causes the
slightest uneasiness, and direct their sensibility to flow in any
channels they think proper. Their whole existence is more theatrical
than real—their sentiments put on or off like the dress of an actor.
Words are with them equivalent to things. They say what is agreeable,
and believe what they say. Virtue and vice, good and evil, liberty and
slavery, are matters almost of indifference. Their natural
self-complacency stands them in stead of all other advantages.’

The foregoing account is pretty near the truth; we have nothing to say
against it; but we shall here endeavour to do a like piece of justice to
our countrymen, who are too apt to mistake the vices of others for so
many virtues in themselves.

If a Frenchman is pleased with every thing, John Bull is pleased with
nothing, and that is a fault. He is, to be sure, fond of having his own
way, till you let him have it. He is a very headstrong animal, who
mistakes the spirit of contradiction for the love of independence, and
proves himself to be in the right by the obstinacy with which he
stickles for the wrong. You cannot put him so much out of his way as by
agreeing with him. He is never in such good-humour as with what gives
him the spleen, and is most satisfied when he is sulky. If you find
fault with him, he is in a rage; and if you praise him, suspects you
have a design upon him. He recommends himself to another by affronting
him, and if that will not do, knocks him down to convince him of his
sincerity. He gives himself such airs as no mortal ever did, and wonders
at the rest of the world for not thinking him the most amiable person
breathing. John means well too, but he has an odd way of showing it, by
a total disregard of other people’s feelings and opinions. He is
sincere, for he tells you at the first word he does not like you; and
never deceives, for he never offers to serve you. A civil answer is too
much to expect from him. A word costs him more than a blow. He is silent
because he has nothing to say, and he looks stupid because he is so. He
has the strangest notions of beauty. The expression he values most in
the human countenance is an appearance of roast beef and plum-pudding;
and if he has a red face and round belly, thinks himself a great man. He
is a little purse-proud, and has a better opinion of himself for having
made a full meal. But his greatest delight is in a bugbear. This he must
have, be the consequence what it may. Whoever will give him that, may
lead him by the nose, and pick his pocket at the same time. An idiot in
a country town, a Presbyterian parson, a dog with a cannister tied to
his tail, a bull-bait, or a fox-hunt, are irresistible attractions to
him. The Pope was formerly his great aversion, and latterly, a cap of
liberty is a thing he cannot abide. He discarded the Pope, and defied
the Inquisition, called the French a nation of slaves and beggars, and
abused their _Grand Monarque_ for a tyrant, cut off one king’s head, and
exiled another, set up a Dutch Stadtholder, and elected a Hanoverian
Elector to be king over him, to shew he would have his own way, and to
teach the rest of the world what they should do: but since other people
took to imitating his example, John has taken it into his head to hinder
them, will have a monopoly of rebellion and regicide to himself, has
become sworn brother to the Pope, and stands by the Inquisition,
restores his old enemies, the Bourbons, and reads _a great moral lesson_
to their subjects, persuades himself that the Dutch Stadtholder and the
Hanoverian Elector came to reign over him by divine right, and does all
he can to prove himself a beast to make other people slaves. The truth
is, John was always a surly, meddlesome, obstinate fellow, and of late
years his _head_ has not been quite right! In short, John is a great
blockhead and a great bully, and requires (what he has been long
labouring for) a hundred years of slavery to bring him to his senses. He
will have it that he is a great patriot, for he hates all other
countries; that he is wise, for he thinks all other people fools; that
he is honest, for he calls all other people whores and rogues. If being
in an ill-humour all one’s life is the perfection of human nature, then
John is very near it. He beats his wife, quarrels with his neighbours,
damns his servants, and gets drunk to kill the time and keep up his
spirits, and firmly believes himself the only unexceptionable,
accomplished, moral, and religious character in Christendom. He boasts
of the excellence of the laws, and the goodness of his own disposition;
and yet there are more people hanged in England than in all Europe
besides: he boasts of the modesty of his countrywomen, and yet there are
more prostitutes in the streets of London than in all the capitals of
Europe put together. He piques himself on his comforts, because he is
the most uncomfortable of mortals; and because he has no enjoyment in
society, seeks it, as he says, at his fireside, where he may be stupid
as a matter of course, sullen as a matter of right, and as ridiculous as
he chuses without being laughed at. His liberty is the effect of his
self-will; his religion owing to the spleen; his temper to the climate.
He is an industrious animal, because he has no taste for amusement, and
had rather work six days in the week than be idle one. His awkward
attempts at gaiety are the jest of other nations. ‘They,’ (the English),
says Froissard, speaking of the meeting of the Black Prince and the
French King, ‘amused themselves sadly, according to the custom of their
country,’—_se rejouissoient tristement, selon la coutume de leur pays_.
Their patience of labour is confined to what is repugnant and
disagreeable in itself, to the drudgery of the mechanic arts, and does
not extend to the fine arts; that is, they are indifferent to pain, but
insensible to pleasure. They will stand in a trench, or march up to a
breach, but they cannot bear to dwell long on an agreeable object. They
can no more submit to regularity in art than to decency in behaviour.
Their pictures are as coarse and slovenly as their address. John boasts
of his great men, without much right to do so; not that he has not had
them, but because he neither knows nor cares anything about them but to
swagger over other nations. That which chiefly hits John’s fancy in
Shakspeare is that he was a deer-stealer in his youth; and, as for
Newton’s discoveries, he hardly knows to this day that the earth is
round. John’s oaths, which are quite characteristic, have got him the
nickname of _Monsieur God-damn-me_. They are profane, a Frenchman’s
indecent. One swears by his vices, the other by their punishment. After
all John’s blustering, he is but a dolt. His habitual jealousy of others
makes him the inevitable dupe of quacks and impostors of all sorts; he
goes all lengths with one party out of spite to another; his zeal is as
furious as his antipathies are unfounded; and there is nothing half so
absurd or ignorant of its own intentions as an English mob.

                                                                      Z.


 NO. 27.]                    ON GOOD-NATURE               [JUNE 9, 1816.

Lord Shaftesbury somewhere remarks, that a great many people pass for
very good-natured persons, for no other reason than because they care
about nobody but themselves; and, consequently, as nothing annoys them
but what touches their own interest, they never irritate themselves
unnecessarily about what does not concern them, and seem to be made of
the very milk of human kindness.

Good-nature, or what is often considered as such, is the most selfish of
all the virtues: it is nine times out of ten mere indolence of
disposition. A good-natured man is, generally speaking, one who does not
like to be put out of his way; and as long as he can help it, that is,
till the provocation comes home to himself, he will not. He does not
create fictitious uneasiness out of the distresses of others; he does
not fret and fume, and make himself uncomfortable about things he cannot
mend, and that no way concern him, even if he could: but then there is
no one who is more apt to be disconcerted by what puts him to any
personal inconvenience, however trifling; who is more tenacious of his
selfish indulgences, however unreasonable; or who resents more violently
any interruption of his ease and comforts, the very trouble he is put to
in resenting it being felt as an aggravation of the injury. A person of
this character feels no emotions of anger or detestation, if you tell
him of the devastation of a province, or the massacre of the inhabitants
of a town, or the enslaving of a people; but if his dinner is spoiled by
a lump of soot falling down the chimney, he is thrown into the utmost
confusion, and can hardly recover a decent command of his temper for the
whole day. He thinks nothing can go amiss, so long as he is at his ease,
though a pain in his little finger makes him so peevish and quarrelsome,
that nobody can come near him. Knavery and injustice in the abstract are
things that by no means ruffle his temper, or alter the serenity of his
countenance, unless he is to be the sufferer by them; nor is he ever
betrayed into a passion in answering a sophism, if he does not think it
immediately directed against his own interest.

On the contrary, we sometimes meet with persons who regularly heat
themselves in an argument, and get out of humour on every occasion, and
make themselves obnoxious to a whole company about nothing. This is not
because they are ill-tempered, but because they are in earnest.
Good-nature is a hypocrite: it tries to pass off its love of its own
ease and indifference to everything else for a particular softness and
mildness of disposition. All people get in a passion, and lose their
temper, if you offer to strike them, or cheat them of their money, that
is, if you interfere with that which they are really interested in.
Tread on the heel of one of these good-natured persons, who do not care
if the whole world is in flames, and see how he will bear it. If the
truth were known, the most disagreeable people are the most amiable.
They are the only persons who feel an interest in what does not concern
them. They have as much regard for others as they have for themselves.
They have as many vexations and causes of complaint as there are in the
world. They are general righters of wrongs, and redressers of
grievances. They not only are annoyed by what they can help, by an act
of inhumanity done in the next street, or in a neighbouring country by
their own countrymen, they not only do not claim any share in the glory,
and hate it the more, the more brilliant the success,—but a piece of
injustice done three thousand years ago touches them to the quick. They
have an unfortunate attachment to a set of abstract phrases, such as
_liberty_, _truth_, _justice_, _humanity_, _honour_, which are
continually abused by knaves, and misunderstood by fools, and they can
hardly contain themselves for spleen. They have something to keep them
in perpetual hot water. No sooner is one question set at rest than
another rises up to perplex them. They wear themselves to the bone in
the affairs of other people, to whom they can do no manner of service,
to the neglect of their own business and pleasure. They tease themselves
to death about the morality of the Turks, or the politics of the French.
There are certain words that afflict their ears, and things that
lacerate their souls, and remain a plague-spot there forever after. They
have a fellow-feeling with all that has been done, said, or thought in
the world. They have an interest in all science and in all art. They
hate a lie as much as a wrong, for truth is the foundation of all
justice. Truth is the first thing in their thoughts, then mankind, then
their country, last themselves. They love excellence, and bow to fame,
which is the shadow of it. Above all, they are anxious to see justice
done to the dead, as the best encouragement to the living, and the
lasting inheritance of future generations. They do not like to see a
great principle undermined, or the fall of a great man. They would
sooner forgive a blow in the face than a wanton attack on acknowledged
reputation. The contempt in which the French hold Shakspeare is a
serious evil to them; nor do they think the matter mended, when they
hear an Englishman, who would be thought a profound one, say that
Voltaire was a man without wit. They are vexed to see genius playing at
Tom Fool, and honesty turned bawd. It gives them a cutting sensation to
see a number of things which, as they are unpleasant to see, we shall
not here repeat. In short, they have a passion for truth; they feel the
same attachment to the idea of what is right, that a knave does to his
interest, or that a good-natured man does to his ease; and they have as
many sources of uneasiness as there are actual or supposed deviations
from this standard in the sum of things, or as there is a possibility of
folly and mischief in the world.

Principle is a passion for truth; an incorrigible attachment to a
general proposition. Good-nature is humanity that costs nothing. No
good-natured man was ever a martyr to a cause, in religion or politics.
He has no idea of striving against the stream. He may become a good
courtier and a loyal subject; and it is hard if he does not, for he has
nothing to do in that case but to consult his ease, interest, and
outward appearances. The Vicar of Bray was a good-natured man. What a
pity he was but a vicar! A good-natured man is utterly unfit for any
situation or office in life that requires integrity, fortitude, or
generosity,—any sacrifice, except of opinion, or any exertion, but to
please. A good-natured man will debauch his friend’s mistress, if he has
an opportunity; and betray his friend, sooner than share disgrace or
danger with him. He will not forego the smallest gratification to save
the whole world. He makes his own convenience the standard of right and
wrong. He avoids the feeling of pain in himself, and shuts his eyes to
the sufferings of others. He will put a malefactor or an innocent person
(no matter which) to the rack, and only laugh at the uncouthness of the
gestures, or wonder that he is so unmannerly as to cry out. There is no
villainy to which he will not lend a helping hand with great coolness
and cordiality, for he sees only the pleasant and profitable side of
things. He will assent to a falsehood with a leer of complacency, and
applaud any atrocity that comes recommended in the garb of authority. He
will betray his country to please a Minister, and sign the death-warrant
of thousands of wretches, rather than forfeit the congenial smile, the
well-known squeeze of the hand. The shrieks of death, the torture of
mangled limbs, the last groans of despair, are things that shock his
smooth humanity too much ever to make an impression on it: his
good-nature sympathizes only with the smile, the bow, the gracious
salutation, the fawning answer: vice loses its sting, and corruption its
poison, in the oily gentleness of his disposition. He will not hear of
any thing wrong in Church or State. He will defend every abuse by which
any thing is to be got, every dirty job, every act of every Minister. In
an extreme case, a very good-natured man indeed may try to hang twelve
honester men than himself to rise at the Bar, and forge the seal of the
realm to continue his colleagues a week longer in office. He is a slave
to the will of others, a coward to their prejudices, a tool of their
vices. A good-natured man is no more fit to be trusted in public
affairs, than a coward or a woman is to lead an army. Spleen is the soul
of patriotism and of public good. Lord Castlereagh is a good-natured
man, Lord Eldon is a good-natured man, Charles Fox was a good-natured
man. The last instance is the most decisive. The definition of a true
patriot is _a good hater_.

A king, who is a good-natured man, is in a fair way of being a great
tyrant. A king ought to feel concern for all to whom his power extends;
but a good-natured man cares only about himself. If he has a good
appetite, eats and sleeps well, nothing in the universe besides can
disturb him. The destruction of the lives or liberties of his subjects
will not stop him in the least of his caprices, but will concoct well
with his bile, and ‘good digestion wait on appetite, and health on
both.’ He will send out his mandate to kill and destroy with the same
indifference or satisfaction that he performs any natural function of
his body. The consequences are placed beyond the reach of his
imagination, or would not affect him if they were not, for he is a fool,
and good-natured. A good-natured man hates more than any one else
whatever thwarts his will, or contradicts his prejudices; and if he has
the power to prevent it, depend upon it, he will use it without remorse
and without control.

There is a lower species of this character which is what is usually
understood by a _well-meaning man_. A well-meaning man is one who often
does a great deal of mischief without any kind of malice. He means no
one any harm, if it is not for his interest. He is not a knave, nor
perfectly honest. He does not easily resign a good place. Mr. Vansittart
is a well-meaning man.

The Irish are a good-natured people; they have many virtues, but their
virtues are those of the heart, not of the head. In their passions and
affections they are sincere, but they are hypocrites in understanding.
If they once begin to calculate the consequences, self-interest
prevails. An Irishman who trusts to his principles, and a Scotchman who
yields to his impulses, are equally dangerous. The Irish have wit,
genius, eloquence, imagination, affections: but they want coherence of
understanding, and consequently have no standard of thought or action.
Their strength of mind does not keep pace with the warmth of their
feelings, or the quickness of their conceptions. Their animal spirits
run away with them: their reason is a jade. There is something crude,
indigested, rash, and discordant, in almost all that they do or say.
They have no system, no abstract ideas. They are ‘everything by starts,
and nothing long.’ They are a wild people. They hate whatever imposes a
law on their understandings, or a yoke on their wills. To betray the
principles they are most bound by their own professions and the
expectations of others to maintain, is with them a reclamation of their
original rights, and to fly in the face of their benefactors and
friends, an assertion of their natural freedom of will. They want
consistency and good faith. They unite fierceness with levity. In the
midst of their headlong impulses, they have an under-current of
selfishness and cunning, which in the end gets the better of them. Their
feelings, when no longer excited by novelty or opposition, grow cold and
stagnant. Their blood, if not heated by passion, turns to poison. They
have a rancour in their hatred of any object they have abandoned,
proportioned to the attachment they have professed to it. Their zeal,
converted against itself, is furious. The late Mr. Burke was an instance
of an Irish patriot and philosopher. He abused metaphysics, because he
could make nothing out of them, and turned his back upon liberty, when
he found he could get nothing more by her.[59]—See to the same purpose
the winding up of the character of _Judy_ in Miss Edgeworth’s _Castle
Rackrent_.

                                                                   T. T.


 NO. 28.]           ON THE CHARACTER OF MILTON’S EVE     [JULY 21, 1816.

The difference between the character of _Eve_ in Milton and Shakspeare’s
female characters is very striking, and it appears to us to be this:
Milton describes _Eve_ not only as full of love and tenderness for
_Adam_, but as the constant object of admiration in herself. She is the
idol of the poet’s imagination, and he paints her whole person with a
studied profusion of charms. She is the wife, but she is still as much
as ever the mistress, of _Adam_. She is represented, indeed, as devoted
to her husband, as twining round him for support ‘as the vine curls her
tendrils,’ but her own grace and beauty are never lost sight of in the
picture of conjugal felicity. _Adam’s_ attention and regard are as much
turned to her as hers to him; for ‘in that first garden of their
innocence,’ he had no other objects or pursuits to distract his
attention; she was both his business and his pleasure. Shakspeare’s
females, on the contrary, seem to exist only in their attachment to
others. They are pure abstractions of the affections. Their features are
not painted, nor the colour of their hair. Their hearts only are laid
open. We are acquainted with _Imogen_, _Miranda_, _Ophelia_, or
_Desdemona_, by what they thought and felt, but we cannot tell whether
they were black, brown, or fair. But Milton’s _Eve_ is all of ivory and
gold. Shakspeare seldom tantalises the reader with a luxurious display
of the personal charms of his heroines, with a curious inventory of
particular beauties, except indirectly, and for some other purpose, as
where _Jachimo_ describes _Imogen_ asleep, or the old men in the
_Winter’s Tale_ vie with each other in invidious praise of _Perdita_.
Even in _Juliet_, the most voluptuous and glowing of the class of
characters here spoken of, we are reminded chiefly of circumstances
connected with the physiognomy of passion, as in her leaning with her
cheek upon her arm, or which only convey the general impression of
enthusiasm made on her lover’s brain. One thing may be said, that
Shakspeare had not the same opportunities as Milton: for his women were
clothed, and it cannot be denied that Milton took _Eve_ at a
considerable disadvantage in this respect. He has accordingly described
her in all the loveliness of nature, tempting to sight as the fruit of
the Hesperides guarded by that Dragon old, herself the fairest among the
flowers of Paradise!

The figures both of _Adam_ and _Eve_ are very prominent in this poem. As
there is little action in it, the interest is constantly kept up by the
beauty and grandeur of the images. They are thus introduced:

            ‘Two of far nobler shape, erect and tall,
            Godlike erect, with native honour clad,
            In naked majesty seemed lords of all,
            And worthy seemed; for in their looks divine
            The image of their glorious Maker shone:

                   .       .       .       .       .

                                      ——Though both
            Not equal, as their sex not equal seem’d;
            For contemplation he and valour form’d,
            For softness she and sweet attractive grace;
            He for God only, she for God in him.
            His fair large front and eye sublime declar’d
            Absolute rule; and hyacinthine locks
            Round from his parted forelock manly hung
            Clust’ring, but not beneath his shoulders broad;
            She as a veil down to the slender waist
            Her unadorned golden tresses wore
            Dishevell’d, but in wanton ringlets wav’d
            As the vine curls her tendrils, which implied
            Subjection, but required with gentle sway,
            And by her yielded, by him best receiv’d,
            Yielded with coy submission, modest pride,
            And sweet reluctant amorous delay.’

_Eve_ is not only represented as beautiful, but with conscious beauty.
Shakspeare’s heroines are almost insensible of their charms, and wound
without knowing it. They are not coquets. If the salvation of mankind
had depended upon one of them, we don’t know—but the Devil might have
been baulked. This is but a conjecture! _Eve_ has a great idea of
herself, and there is some difficulty in prevailing on her to quit her
own image, the first time she discovers its reflection in the water. She
gives the following account of herself to _Adam_:

            ‘That day I oft remember, when from sleep
            I first awak’d, and found myself repos’d
            Under a shade on flow’rs, much wond’ring where
            And what I was, whence thither brought and how.
            Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
            Of waters issued from a cave, and spread
            Into a liquid plain, then stood unmov’d
            Pure as the expanse of Heav’n; I thither went
            With unexperienc’d thought, and laid me down
            On the green bank, to look into the clear
            Smooth lake, that to me seem’d another sky.
            As I bent down to look, just opposite
            A shape within the watery gleam appear’d,
            Bending to look on me; I started back,
            It started back; but pleas’d I soon return’d,
            Pleas’d it return’d as soon with answ’ring looks
            Of sympathy and love.’...

The poet afterwards adds:

             ‘So spake our general mother, and with eyes
             Of conjugal attraction unreprov’d,
             And meek surrender, half-embracing lean’d
             On our first father; half her swelling breast
             Naked met his under the flowing gold
             Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight
             Both of her beauty and submissive charms;
             Smil’d with superior love, as Jupiter
             On Juno smiles, when he impregns the clouds
             That shed May flowers.’

The same thought is repeated with greater simplicity, and perhaps even
beauty, in the beginning of the Fifth Book:

                              ——‘So much the more
            His wonder was to find unawaken’d Eve
            With tresses discompos’d and glowing cheek,
            As through unquiet rest: he on his side
            Leaning half-rais’d, with looks of cordial love
            Hung over her enamour’d, and beheld
            Beauty, which whether waking or asleep
            Shot forth peculiar graces; then, with voice
            Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
            Her hand soft touching, whisper’d thus. Awake
            My fairest, my espous’d, my latest found,
            Heav’n’s last best gift, my ever new delight,
            Awake’....

The general style, indeed, in which _Eve_ is addressed by _Adam_, or
described by the poet, is in the highest strain of compliment:

            ‘When Adam thus to Eve. Fair consort, the hour
            Of night approaches.’...

            ‘To whom thus Eve, with perfect beauty adorn’d.’

            ‘To whom our general ancestor replied,
            Daughter of God and Man, accomplish’d Eve.’

_Eve_ is herself so well convinced that these epithets are her due, that
the idea follows her in her sleep, and she dreams of herself as the
paragon of nature, the wonder of the universe:

                                 ——‘Methought
           Close at mine ear one call’d me forth to walk,
           With gentle voice, I thought it thine; it said,
           Why sleep’st thou, Eve? Now is the pleasant time,
           The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
           To the night-warbling bird, that now awake
           Tunes sweetest his love-labour’d song; now reigns
           Full-orb’d the moon, and with more pleasing light
           Shadowy sets off the face of things; in vain,
           If none regard; Heav’n wakes with all his eyes,
           Whom to behold but thee, Nature’s desire?
           In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
           Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.’

This is the very topic, too, on which the Serpent afterwards enlarges
with so much artful insinuation and fatal confidence of success. ‘So
talked the spirited sly snake.’ The conclusion of the foregoing scene,
in which _Eve_ relates her dream and _Adam_ comforts her, is such an
exquisite piece of description, that, though not to our immediate
purpose, we cannot refrain from quoting it:

          ‘So cheer’d he his fair spouse, and she was cheer’d;
          But silently a gentle tear let fall
          From either eye, and wip’d them with her hair;
          Two other precious drops that ready stood,
          Each in their crystal sluice, he ere they fell
          Kiss’d, as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
          And pious awe, that fear’d to have offended.’

The formal eulogy on _Eve_ which _Adam_ addresses to the Angel, in
giving an account of his own creation and hers, is full of elaborate
grace:

           ‘Under his forming hands a creature grew,
           .    .    .    .    .    so lovely fair,
           That what seem’d fair in all the world, seem’d now
           Mean, or in her summ’d up, in her contained
           And in her looks, which from that time infus’d
           Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
           And into all things from her air inspir’d
           The spirit of love and amorous delight.’

That which distinguishes Milton from the other poets, who have pampered
the eye and fed the imagination with exuberant descriptions of female
beauty, is the moral severity with which he has tempered them. There is
not a line in his works which tends to licentiousness, or the impression
of which, if it has such a tendency, is not effectually checked by
thought and sentiment. The following are two remarkable instances:

                           ——‘In shadier bower
           More secret and sequester’d, though but feign’d,
           Pan or Sylvanus never slept, nor Nymph,
           Nor Faunus haunted. Here in close recess,
           With flowers, garlands, and sweet-smelling herbs,
           Espoused Eve deck’d first her nuptial bed,
           And heavenly quires the hymenœan sung,
           What day the genial Angel to our sire
           Brought her in naked beauty more adorn’d,
           More lovely than Pandora, whom the Gods
           Endow’d with all their gifts, and O too like
           In sad event, when to th’ unwiser son
           Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnar’d
           Mankind by her fair looks, to be aveng’d
           On him who had stole Jove’s authentic fire.’

The other is a passage of extreme beauty and pathos blended. It is the
one in which the Angel is described as the guest of our first ancestors:

                              ——‘Meanwhile at table Eve
              Minister’d naked, and their flowing cups
              With pleasant liquors crown’d: O innocence
              Deserving Paradise! if ever, then,
              Then had the sons of God excuse to have been
              Enamour’d at that sight; but in those hearts
              Love unlibidinous reigned, nor jealousy
              Was understood, the injur’d lover’s Hell.’

The character which a living poet has given of Spenser, would be much
more true of Milton:

                         ——‘Yet not more sweet
             Than pure was he, and not more pure than wise;
             High Priest of all the Muses’ mysteries.’

Spenser, on the contrary, is very apt to pry into mysteries which do not
belong to the Muses. Milton’s voluptuousness is not lascivious or
sensual. He describes beautiful objects for their own sakes. Spenser has
an eye to the consequences, and steeps everything in pleasure, often not
of the purest kind. The want of passion has been brought as an objection
against Milton, and his _Adam_ and _Eve_ have been considered as rather
insipid personages, wrapped up in one another, and who excite but little
sympathy in any one else. We do not feel this objection ourselves: we
are content to be spectators in such scenes, without any other
excitement. In general, the interest in Milton is essentially epic, and
not dramatic; and the difference between the epic and the dramatic is
this, that in the former the imagination produces the passion, and in
the latter the passion produces the imagination. The interest of epic
poetry arises from the contemplation of certain objects in themselves
grand and beautiful: the interest of dramatic poetry from sympathy with
the passions and pursuits of others; that is, from the practical
relations of certain persons to certain objects, as depending on
accident or will.

The Pyramids of Egypt are epic objects; the imagination of them is
necessarily attended with passion; but they have no dramatic interest,
till circumstances connect them with some human catastrophe. Now, a poem
might be constructed almost entirely of such images, of the highest
intellectual passion, with little dramatic interest; and it is in this
way that Milton has in a great measure constructed his poem. That is not
its fault, but its excellence. The fault is in those who have no idea
but of one kind of interest. But this question would lead to a longer
discussion than we have room for at present. We shall conclude these
extracts from Milton with two passages, which have always appeared to us
to be highly affecting, and to contain a fine discrimination of
character:

            ‘O unexpected stroke, worse than of Death!
            Must I thus leave thee, Paradise? thus leave
            Thee, native soil, these happy walks and shades,
            Fit haunt of Gods? Where I had hope to spend,
            Quiet, though sad, the respite of that day
            That must be mortal to us both? O flowers,
            That never will in other climate grow,
            My early visitation and my last
            At even, which I bred up with tender hand
            From the first opening bud, and gave ye names,
            Who now shall rear ye to the sun, or rank
            Your tribes, and water from th’ ambrosial fount?
            Thee, lastly, nuptial bow’r, by me adorn’d
            With what to sight or smell was sweet, from thee
            How shall I part, and whither wander down
            Into a lower world, to this obscure
            And wild? how shall we breathe in other air
            Less pure, accustom’d to immortal fruits?’

This is the lamentation of _Eve_ on being driven out of Paradise. Adam’s
reflections are in a different strain, and still finer. After expressing
his submission to the will of his Maker, he says:

           ‘This most afflicts me, that departing hence
           As from his face I shall be hid, depriv’d
           His blessed countenance; here I could frequent
           With worship place by place where he vouchsaf’d
           Presence divine, and to my sons relate,
           On this mount he appeared, under this tree
           Stood visible, among these pines his voice
           I heard, here with him at this fountain talk’d:
           So many grateful altars I would rear
           Of grassy turf, and pile up every stone
           Of lustre from the brook, in memory
           Or monument to ages, and thereon
           Offer sweet-smelling gums and fruits and flow’rs:
           In yonder nether world where shall I seek
           His bright appearances or footstep trace?
           For though I fled him angry, yet recall’d
           To life prolong’d and promis’d race, I now
           Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts
           Of glory, and far off his steps adore.’

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 29.]         OBSERVATIONS ON MR. WORDSWORTH’S POEM    [AUG. 21, 28,
                              THE EXCURSION                        1814.

The poem of The _Excursion_ resembles that part of the country in which
the scene is laid. It has the same vastness and magnificence, with the
same nakedness and confusion. It has the same overwhelming, oppressive
power. It excites or recalls the same sensations which those who have
traversed that wonderful scenery must have felt. We are surrounded with
the constant sense and superstitious awe of the collective power of
matter, of the gigantic and eternal forms of nature, on which, from the
beginning of time, the hand of man has made no impression. Here are no
dotted lines, no hedge-row beauties, no box-tree borders, no gravel
walks, no square mechanic inclosures; all is left loose and irregular in
the rude chaos of aboriginal nature. The boundaries of hill and valley
are the poet’s only geography, where we wander with him incessantly over
deep beds of moss and waving fern, amidst the troops of red-deer and
wild animals. Such is the severe simplicity of Mr. Wordsworth’s taste,
that we doubt whether he would not reject a druidical temple, or
time-hallowed ruin as too modern and artificial for his purpose. He only
familiarises himself or his readers with a stone, covered with lichens,
which has slept in the same spot of ground from the creation of the
world, or with the rocky fissure between two mountains caused by
thunder, or with a cavern scooped out by the sea. His mind is, as it
were, coëval with the primary forms of things; his imagination holds
immediately from nature, and ‘owes no allegiance’ but ‘to the elements.’

The _Excursion_ may be considered as a philosophical pastoral poem,—as a
scholastic romance. It is less a poem on the country, than on the love
of the country. It is not so much a description of natural objects, as
of the feelings associated with them; not an account of the manners of
rural life, but the result of the poet’s reflections on it. He does not
present the reader with a lively succession of images or incidents, but
paints the outgoings of his own heart, the shapings of his own fancy. He
may be said to create his own materials; his thoughts are his real
subject. His understanding broods over that which is ‘without form and
void,’ and ‘makes it pregnant.’ He sees all things in himself. He hardly
ever avails himself of remarkable objects or situations, but, in
general, rejects them as interfering with the workings of his own mind,
as disturbing the smooth, deep, majestic current of his own feelings.
Thus his descriptions of natural scenery are not brought home distinctly
to the naked eye by forms and circumstances, but every object is seen
through the medium of innumerable recollections, is clothed with the
haze of imagination like a glittering vapour, is obscured with the
excess of glory, has the shadowy brightness of a waking dream. The image
is lost in the sentiment, as sound in the multiplication of echoes.

             ‘And visions, as prophetic eyes avow,
             Hang on each leaf, and cling to every bough.’

In describing human nature, Mr. Wordsworth equally shuns the common
‘vantage-grounds of popular story, of striking incident, or fatal
catastrophe, as cheap and vulgar modes of producing an effect. He scans
the human race as the naturalist measures the earth’s zone, without
attending to the picturesque points of view, the abrupt inequalities of
surface. He contemplates the passions and habits of men, not in their
extremes, but in their first elements; their follies and vices, not at
their height, with all their embossed evils upon their heads, but as
lurking in embryo,—the seeds of the disorder inwoven with our very
constitution. He only sympathises with those simple forms of feeling,
which mingle at once with his own identity, or with the stream of
general humanity. To him the great and the small are the same; the near
and the remote; what appears, and what only is. The general and the
permanent, like the Platonic ideas, are his only realities. All
accidental varieties and individual contrasts are lost in an endless
continuity of feeling, like drops of water in the ocean-stream! An
intense intellectual egotism swallows up every thing. Even the dialogues
introduced in the present volume are soliloquies of the same character,
taking different views of the subject. The recluse, the pastor, and the
pedlar, are three persons in one poet. We ourselves disapprove of these
‘interlocutions between Lucius and Caius’ as impertinent babbling, where
there is no dramatic distinction of character. But the evident scope and
tendency of Mr. Wordsworth’s mind is the reverse of dramatic. It resists
all change of character, all variety of scenery, all the bustle,
machinery, and pantomime of the stage, or of real life,—whatever might
relieve, or relax, or change the direction of its own activity, jealous
of all competition. The power of his mind preys upon itself. It is as if
there were nothing but himself and the universe. He lives in the busy
solitude of his own heart; in the deep silence of thought. His
imagination lends life and feeling only to ‘the bare trees and mountains
bare’; peoples the viewless tracts of air, and converses with the silent
clouds!

We could have wished that our author had given to his work the form of a
didactic poem altogether, with only occasional digressions or allusions
to particular instances. But he has chosen to encumber himself with a
load of narrative and description, which sometimes hinders the progress
and effect of the general reasoning, and which, instead of being inwoven
with the text, would have come in better in plain prose as notes at the
end of the volume. Mr. Wordsworth, indeed, says finely, and perhaps as
truly as finely:

            ‘Exchange the shepherd’s frock of native grey
            For robes with regal purple tinged; convert
            The crook into a sceptre; give the pomp
            Of circumstance; and here the tragic Muse
            Shall find apt subjects for her highest art.
            Amid the groves, beneath the shadowy hills,
            The generations are prepared; the pangs,
            The internal pangs, are ready; the dread strife
            Of poor humanity’s afflicted will
            Struggling in vain with ruthless destiny.’

But he immediately declines availing himself of these resources of the
rustic moralist: for the priest, who officiates as ‘the sad historian of
the pensive plain’ says in reply:

           ‘Our system is not fashioned to preclude
           That sympathy which you for others ask:
           And I could tell, not travelling for my theme
           Beyond the limits of these humble graves,
           Of strange disasters; but I pass them by,
           Loth to disturb what Heaven hath hushed to peace.’

There is, in fact, in Mr. Wordsworth’s mind an evident repugnance to
admit anything that tells for itself, without the interpretation of the
poet,—a fastidious antipathy to immediate effect,—a systematic
unwillingness to share the palm with his subject. Where, however, he has
a subject presented to him, ‘such as the meeting soul may pierce,’ and
to which he does not grudge to lend the aid of his fine genius, his
powers of description and fancy seem to be little inferior to those of
his classical predecessor, Akenside. Among several others which we might
select we give the following passage, describing the religion of ancient
Greece:

          ‘In that fair clime, the lonely herdsman, stretch’d
          On the soft grass through half a summer’s day,
          With music lulled his indolent repose:
          And in some fit of weariness, if he,
          When his own breath was silent, chanced to hear
          A distant strain, far sweeter than the sounds
          Which his poor skill could make, his fancy fetch’d,
          Even from the blazing chariot of the sun,
          A beardless youth, who touched a golden lute,
          And filled the illumined groves with ravishment.
          The nightly hunter, lifting up his eyes
          Towards the crescent moon, with grateful heart
          Called on the lovely wanderer, who bestowed
          That timely light, to share his joyous sport:
          And hence, a beaming Goddess with her Nymphs
          Across the lawn and through the darksome grove,
          (Nor unaccompanied with tuneful notes
          By echo multiplied from rock or cave),
          Swept in the storm of chase, as moon and stars
          Glance rapidly along the clouded heavens,
          When winds are blowing strong. The traveller slaked
          His thirst from rill, or gushing fount, and thanked
          The Naiad. Sun beams, upon distant hills
          Gliding apace, with shadows in their train,
          Might, with small help from fancy, be transformed
          Into fleet Oreads, sporting visibly.
          The zephyrs fanning as they passed their wings
          Lacked not for love fair objects, whom they wooed
          With gentle whisper. Withered boughs grotesque,
          Stripped of their leaves and twigs by hoary age,
          From depth of shaggy covert peeping forth
          In the low vale, or on steep mountain side:
          And sometimes intermixed with stirring horns
          Of the live deer, or goat’s depending beard;
          These were the lurking satyrs, a wild brood
          Of gamesome Deities! or Pan himself,
          The simple shepherd’s awe-inspiring God.’

The foregoing is one of a succession of splendid passages equally
enriched with philosophy and poetry, tracing the fictions of Eastern
mythology to the immediate intercourse of the imagination with Nature,
and to the habitual propensity of the human mind to endow the outward
forms of being with life and conscious motion. With this expansive and
animating principle, Mr. Wordsworth has forcibly, but somewhat severely,
contrasted the cold, narrow, lifeless spirit of modern philosophy:

            ‘How, shall our great discoverers obtain
            From sense and reason less than these obtained,
            Though far misled? Shall men for whom our age
            Unbaffled powers of vision hath prepared,
            To explore the world without and world within,
            Be joyless as the blind? Ambitious souls—
            Whom earth at this late season hath produced
            To regulate the moving spheres, and weigh
            The planets in the hollow of their hand;
            And they who rather dive than soar, whose pains
            Have solved the elements, or analysed
            The thinking principle—shall they in fact
            Prove a degraded race? And what avails
            Renown, if their presumption make them such?
            Inquire of ancient wisdom; go, demand
            Of mighty nature, if ’twas ever meant
            That we should pry far off, yet be unraised;
            That we should pore, and dwindle as we pore,
            Viewing all objects unremittingly
            In disconnection dead and spiritless;
            And still dividing and dividing still
            Break down all grandeur, still unsatisfied
            With the perverse attempt, while littleness
            May yet become more little; waging thus
            An impious warfare with the very life
            Of our own souls! And if indeed there be
            An all-pervading spirit, upon whom
            Our dark foundations rest, could he design,
            That this magnificent effect of power,
            The earth we tread, the sky which we behold
            By day, and all the pomp which night reveals,
            That these—and that superior mystery,
            Our vital frame, so fearfully devised,
            And the dread soul within it—should exist
            Only to be examined, pondered, searched,
            Probed, vexed, and criticised—to be prized
            No more than as a mirror that reflects
            To proud Self-love her own intelligence?’

From the chemists and metaphysicians our author turns to the laughing
sage of France, Voltaire. ‘Poor gentleman, it fares no better with him,
for he’s a wit.’ We cannot, however, agree with Mr. Wordsworth that
_Candide_ is _dull_. It is, if our author pleases, ‘the production of a
scoffer’s pen,’ or it is any thing but dull. It may not be proper in a
grave, discreet, orthodox, promising young divine, who studies his
opinions in the contraction or distension of his patron’s brow, to allow
any merit to a work like _Candide_; but we conceive that it would have
been more manly in Mr. Wordsworth, nor do we think it would have hurt
the cause he espouses, if he had blotted out the epithet, after it had
peevishly escaped him. Whatsoever savours of a little, narrow,
inquisitorial spirit, does not sit well on a poet and a man of genius.
The prejudices of a philosopher are not natural. There is a frankness
and sincerity of opinion, which is a paramount obligation in all
questions of intellect, though it may not govern the decisions of the
spiritual courts, who may, however, be safely left to take care of their
own interests. There is a plain directness and simplicity of
understanding, which is the only security against the evils of levity,
on the one hand, or of hypocrisy on the other. A speculative bigot is a
solecism in the intellectual world. We can assure Mr. Wordsworth, that
we should not have bestowed so much serious consideration on a single
voluntary perversion of language, but that our respect for his character
makes us jealous of his smallest faults!

With regard to his general philippic against the contractedness and
egotism of philosophical pursuits, we only object to its not being
carried further. We shall not affirm with Rousseau (his authority would
perhaps have little weight with Mr. Wordsworth)—‘_Tout homme reflechi
est mechant_‘; but we conceive that the same reasoning which Mr.
Wordsworth applies so eloquently and justly to the natural philosopher
and metaphysician may be extended to the moralist, the divine, the
politician, the orator, the artist, and even the poet. And why so?
Because wherever an intense activity is given to any one faculty, it
necessarily prevents the due and natural exercise of others. Hence all
those professions or pursuits, where the mind is exclusively occupied
with the ideas of things as they exist in the imagination or
understanding, as they call for the exercise of intellectual activity,
and not as they are connected with practical good or evil, must check
the genial expansion of the moral sentiments and social affections; must
lead to a cold and dry abstraction, as they are found to suspend the
animal functions, and relax the bodily frame. Hence the complaint of the
want of natural sensibility and constitutional warmth of attachment in
those persons who have been devoted to the pursuit of any art or
science,—of their restless morbidity of temperament, and indifference to
every thing that does not furnish an occasion for the display of their
mental superiority and the gratification of their vanity. The
philosophical poet himself, perhaps, owes some of his love of nature to
the opportunity it affords him of analyzing his own feelings, and
contemplating his own powers,—of making every object about him a whole
length mirror to reflect his favourite thoughts, and of looking down on
the frailties of others in undisturbed leisure, and from a more
dignified height.

One of the most interesting parts of this work is that in which the
author treats of the French Revolution, and of the feelings connected
with it, in ingenuous minds, in its commencement and its progress. The
_solitary_,[60] who, by domestic calamities and disappointments, had
been cut off from society, and almost from himself, gives the following
account of the manner in which he was roused from his melancholy:

         ‘From that abstraction I was roused—and how?
         Even as a thoughtful shepherd by a flash
         Of lightning, startled in a gloomy cave
         Of these wild hills. For, lo! the dread Bastile,
         With all the chambers in its horrid towers,
         Fell to the ground: by violence o’erthrown
         Of indignation; and with shouts that drowned
         The crash it made in falling! From the wreck
         A golden palace rose, or seemed to rise,
         The appointed seat of equitable law
         And mild paternal sway. The potent shock
         I felt; the transformation I perceived,
         As marvellously seized as in that moment,
         When, from the blind mist issuing, I beheld
         Glory—beyond all glory ever seen,
         Dazzling the soul! Meanwhile prophetic harps
         In every grove were ringing, “War shall cease:
         Did ye not hear that conquest is abjured?
         Bring garlands, bring forth choicest flowers, to deck
         The tree of liberty!”—My heart rebounded:
         My melancholy voice the chorus joined.
         Thus was I reconverted to the world;
         Society became my glittering bride,
         And airy hopes my children. From the depths
         Of natural passion seemingly escaped,
         My soul diffused itself in wide embrace
         Of institutions and the forms of things.
                                       ——If with noise
         And acclamation, crowds in open air
         Expressed the tumult of their minds, my voice
         There mingled, heard or not. And in still groves,
         Where wild enthusiasts tuned a pensive lay
         Of thanks and expectation, in accord
         With their belief, I sang Saturnian rule
         Returned—a progeny of golden years
         Permitted to descend, and bless mankind.

                .       .       .       .       .

         Scorn and contempt forbid me to proceed!
         But history, time’s slavish scribe, will tell
         How rapidly the zealots of the cause
         Disbanded—or in hostile ranks appeared:
         Some, tired of honest service; these outdone,
         Disgusted, therefore, or appalled by aims
         Of fiercer zealots. So confusion reigned,
         And the more faithful were compelled to exclaim,
         As Brutus did to virtue, “Liberty,
         I worshipped thee, and find thee but a shade!”
         SUCH RECANTATION HAD FOR ME NO CHARM,
         NOR WOULD I BEND TO IT.’

The subject is afterwards resumed, with the same magnanimity and
philosophical firmness:

                                  ——‘For that other loss,
            The loss of confidence in social man,
            By the unexpected transports of our age
            Carried so high, that every thought which looked
            Beyond the temporal destiny of the kind—
            To many seemed superfluous; as no cause
            For such exalted confidence could e’er
            Exist; so, none is now for such despair.
            The two extremes are equally remote
            From truth and reason; do not, then, confound
            One with the other, but reject them both;
            And choose the middle point, whereon to build
            Sound expectations. This doth he advise
            Who shared at first the illusion. At this day,
            When a Tartarian darkness overspreads
            The groaning nations; when the impious rule,
            By will or by established ordinance,
            Their own dire agents, and constrain the good
            To acts which they abhor; though I bewail
            This triumph, yet the pity of my heart
            Prevents me not from owning that the law,
            By which mankind now suffers, is most just.
            For by superior energies; more strict
            Affiance in each other; faith more firm
            In their unhallowed principles, the bad
            Have fairly earned a victory o’er the weak,
            The vacillating, inconsistent good.’

In the application of these memorable lines, we should, perhaps, differ
a little from Mr. Wordsworth; nor can we indulge with him in the fond
conclusion afterwards hinted at, that one day _our_ triumph, the triumph
of humanity and liberty, may be complete. For this purpose, we think
several things necessary which are impossible. It is a consummation
which cannot happen till the nature of things is changed, till the many
become as united as the _one_, till romantic generosity shall be as
common as gross selfishness, till reason shall have acquired the
obstinate blindness of prejudice, till the love of power and of change
shall no longer goad man on to restless action, till passion and will,
hope and fear, love and hatred, and the objects proper to excite them,
that is, alternate good and evil, shall no longer sway the bosoms and
businesses of men. All things move, not in progress, but in a ceaseless
round; our strength lies in our weakness; our virtues are built on our
vices; our faculties are as limited as our being; nor can we lift man
above his nature more than above the earth he treads. But though we
cannot weave over again the airy, unsubstantial dream, which reason and
experience have dispelled,

          ‘What though the radiance, which was once so bright,
          Be now for ever taken from our sight,
          Though nothing can bring back the hour
          Of glory in the grass, of splendour in the flower’:—

yet we will never cease, nor be prevented from returning on the wings of
imagination to that bright dream of our youth; that glad dawn of the
day-star of liberty; that spring-time of the world, in which the hopes
and expectations of the human race seemed opening in the same gay career
with our own; when France called her children to partake her equal
blessings beneath her laughing skies; when the stranger was met in all
her villages with dance and festive songs, in celebration of a new and
golden era; and when, to the retired and contemplative student, the
prospects of human happiness and glory were seen ascending like the
steps of Jacob’s ladder, in bright and never-ending succession. The dawn
of that day was suddenly overcast; that season of hope is past; it is
fled with the other dreams of our youth, which we cannot recal, but has
left behind it traces, which are not to be effaced by Birth-day and
Thanks-giving odes, or the chaunting of _Te Deums_ in all the churches
of Christendom. To those hopes eternal regrets are due; to those who
maliciously and wilfully blasted them, in the fear that they might be
accomplished, we feel no less what we owe—hatred and scorn as lasting!


 NO. 30.]              THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED         [OCT. 2, 1814.

Mr. Wordsworth’s writings exhibit all the internal power, without the
external form of poetry. He has scarcely any of the pomp and decoration
and scenic effect of poetry: no gorgeous palaces nor solemn temples awe
the imagination; no cities rise ‘with glistering spires and pinnacles
adorned’; we meet with no knights pricked forth on airy steeds; no
hair-breadth ‘scapes and perilous accidents by flood or field. Either
from the predominant habit of his mind not requiring the stimulus of
outward impressions, or from the want of an imagination teeming with
various forms, he takes the common every-day events and objects of
nature, or rather seeks those that are the most simple and barren of
effect; but he adds to them a weight of interest from the resources of
his own mind, which makes the most insignificant things serious and even
formidable. All other interests are absorbed in the deeper interest of
his own thoughts, and find the same level. His mind magnifies the
littleness of his subject, and raises its meanness; lends it his
strength, and clothes it with borrowed grandeur. With him, a mole-hill,
covered with wild thyme, assumes the importance of ‘the great vision of
the guarded mount’: a puddle is filled with preternatural faces, and
agitated with the fiercest storms of passion.

The extreme simplicity which some persons have objected to in Mr.
Wordsworth’s poetry, is to be found only in the subject and the style:
the sentiments are subtle and profound. In the latter respect, his
poetry is as much above the common standard or capacity, as in the other
it is below it. His poems bear a distant resemblance to some of
Rembrandt’s landscapes, who, more than any other painter, created the
medium through which he saw nature, and out of the stump of an old tree,
a break in the sky, and a bit of water, could produce an effect almost
miraculous.

Mr. Wordsworth’s poems in general are the history of a refined and
contemplative mind, conversant only with itself and nature. An intense
feeling of the associations of this kind is the peculiar and
characteristic feature of all his productions. He has described the love
of nature better than any other poet. This sentiment, inly felt in all
its force, and sometimes carried to an excess, is the source both of his
strength and of his weakness. However we may sympathise with Mr.
Wordsworth in his attachment to groves and fields, we cannot extend the
same admiration to their inhabitants, or to the manners of country life
in general. We go along with him, while he is the subject of his own
narrative, but we take leave of him when he makes pedlars and ploughmen
his heroes and the interpreters of his sentiments. It is, we think,
getting into low company, and company, besides, that we do not like. We
take Mr. Wordsworth himself for a great poet, a fine moralist, and a
deep philosopher; but if he insists on introducing us to a friend of
his, a parish clerk, or the barber of the village, who is as wise as
himself, we must be excused if we draw back with some little want of
cordial faith. We are satisfied with the friendship which subsisted
between _Parson Adams_ and _Joseph Andrews_. The author himself lets out
occasional hints that all is not as it should be amongst these northern
Arcadians. Though, in general, he professes to soften the harsher
features of rustic vice, he has given us one picture of depraved and
inveterate selfishness, which we apprehend could only be found among the
inhabitants of these boasted mountain districts. The account of one of
his heroines concludes as follows:

          ‘A sudden illness seiz’d her in the strength
          Of life’s autumnal season. Shall I tell
          How on her bed of death the matron lay,
          To Providence submissive, so she thought;
          But fretted, vexed, and wrought upon—almost
          To anger, by the malady that griped
          Her prostrate frame with unrelaxing power,
          As the fierce eagle fastens on the lamb.
          She prayed, she moaned—her husband’s sister watched
          Her dreary pillow, waited on her needs;
          And yet the very sound of that kind foot
          Was anguish to her ears! “And must she rule
          Sole mistress of this house when I am gone?
          Sit by my fire—possess what I possessed—
          Tend what I tended—calling it her own!”
          Enough;—I fear too much. Of nobler feeling
          Take this example:—One autumnal evening,
          While she was yet in prime of health and strength,
          I well remember, while I passed her door,
          Musing with loitering step, and upward eye
          Turned tow’rds the planet Jupiter, that hung
          Above the centre of the vale, a voice
          Roused me, her voice;—it said, “That glorious star
          In its untroubled element will shine
          As now it shines, when we are laid in earth,
          And safe from all our sorrows.” She is safe,
          And her uncharitable acts, I trust,
          And harsh unkindnesses, are all forgiven;
          Though, in this vale, remembered with deep awe!’

We think it is pushing our love of the admiration of natural objects a
good deal too far, to make it a set-off against a story like the
preceding.

All country people hate each other. They have so little comfort, that
they envy their neighbours the smallest pleasure or advantage, and
nearly grudge themselves the necessaries of life. From not being
accustomed to enjoyment, they become hardened and averse to it—stupid,
for want of thought—selfish, for want of society. There is nothing good
to be had in the country, or, if there is, they will not let you have
it. They had rather injure themselves than oblige any one else. Their
common mode of life is a system of wretchedness and self-denial, like
what we read of among barbarous tribes. You live out of the world. You
cannot get your tea and sugar without sending to the next town for it:
you pay double, and have it of the worst quality. The small-beer is sure
to be sour—the milk skimmed—the meat bad, or spoiled in the cooking. You
cannot do a single thing you like; you cannot walk out or sit at home,
or write or read, or think or look as if you did, without being subject
to impertinent curiosity. The apothecary annoys you with his
complaisance; the parson with his superciliousness. If you are poor, you
are despised; if you are rich, you are feared and hated. If you do any
one a favour, the whole neighbourhood is up in arms; the clamour is like
that of a rookery; and the person himself, it is ten to one, laughs at
you for your pains, and takes the first opportunity of shewing you that
he labours under no uneasy sense of obligation. There is a perpetual
round of mischief-making and backbiting for want of any better
amusement. There are no shops, no taverns, no theatres, no opera, no
concerts, no pictures, no public-buildings, no crowded streets, no noise
of coaches, or of courts of law,—neither courtiers nor courtesans, no
literary parties, no fashionable routs, no society, no books, or
knowledge of books. Vanity and luxury are the civilisers of the world,
and sweeteners of human life. Without objects either of pleasure or
action, it grows harsh and crabbed: the mind becomes stagnant, the
affections callous, and the eye dull. Man left to himself soon
degenerates into a very disagreeable person. Ignorance is always bad
enough; but rustic ignorance is intolerable. Aristotle has observed,
that tragedy purifies the affections by terror and pity. If so, a
company of tragedians should be established at the public expence, in
every village or hundred, as a better mode of education than either
Bell’s or Lancaster’s. The benefits of knowledge are never so well
understood as from seeing the effects of ignorance, in their naked,
undisguised state, upon the common country people. Their selfishness and
insensibility are perhaps less owing to the hardships and privations,
which make them, like people out at sea in a boat, ready to devour one
another, than to their having no idea of anything beyond themselves and
their immediate sphere of action. They have no knowledge of, and
consequently can take no interest in, anything which is not an object of
their senses, and of their daily pursuits. They hate all strangers, and
have generally a nickname for the inhabitants of the next village. The
two young noblemen in Guzman d’Alfarache, who went to visit their
mistresses only a league out of Madrid, were set upon by the peasants,
who came round them calling out, ‘_A wolf_.’ Those who have no enlarged
or liberal ideas, can have no disinterested or generous sentiments.
Persons who are in the habit of reading novels and romances, are
compelled to take a deep interest in, and to have their affections
strongly excited by, fictitious characters and imaginary situations;
their thoughts and feelings are constantly carried out of themselves, to
persons they never saw, and things that never existed: history enlarges
the mind, by familiarising us with the great vicissitudes of human
affairs, and the catastrophes of states and kingdoms; the study of
morals accustoms us to refer our actions to a general standard of right
and wrong; and abstract reasoning, in general, strengthens the love of
truth, and produces an inflexibility of principle which cannot stoop to
low trick and cunning. Books, in Lord Bacon’s phrase, are ‘a discipline
of humanity.’ Country people have none of these advantages, nor any
others to supply the place of them. Having no circulating libraries to
exhaust their love of the marvellous, they amuse themselves with
fancying the disasters and disgraces of their particular acquaintance.
Having no hump-backed _Richard_ to excite their wonder and abhorrence,
they make themselves a bugbear of their own, out of the first obnoxious
person they can lay their hands on. Not having the fictitious distresses
and gigantic crimes of poetry to stimulate their imagination and their
passions, they vent their whole stock of spleen, malice, and invention,
on their friends and next-door neighbours. They get up a little pastoral
drama at home, with fancied events, but real characters. All their spare
time is spent in manufacturing and propagating the lie for the day,
which does its office, and expires. The next day is spent in the same
manner. It is thus that they embellish the simplicity of rural life! The
common people in civilised countries are a kind of domesticated savages.
They have not the wild imagination, the passions, the fierce energies,
or dreadful vicissitudes of the savage tribes, nor have they the
leisure, the indolent enjoyments and romantic superstitions, which
belonged to the pastoral life in milder climates, and more remote
periods of society. They are taken out of a state of nature, without
being put in possession of the refinements of art. The customs and
institutions of society cramp their imaginations without giving them
knowledge. If the inhabitants of the mountainous districts described by
Mr. Wordsworth are less gross and sensual than others, they are more
selfish. Their egotism becomes more concentrated, as they are more
insulated, and their purposes more inveterate, as they have less
competition to struggle with. The weight of matter which surrounds them,
crushes the finer sympathies. Their minds become hard and cold, like the
rocks which they cultivate. The immensity of their mountains makes the
human form appear little and insignificant. Men are seen crawling
between Heaven and earth, like insects to their graves. Nor do they
regard one another more than flies on a wall. Their physiognomy
expresses the materialism of their character, which has only one
principle—rigid self-will. They move on with their eyes and foreheads
fixed, looking neither to the right nor to the left, with a heavy slouch
in their gait, and seeming as if nothing would divert them from their
path. We do not admire this plodding pertinacity, always directed to the
main chance. There is nothing which excites so little sympathy in our
minds, as exclusive selfishness. If our theory is wrong, at least it is
taken from pretty close observation, and is, we think, confirmed by Mr.
Wordsworth’s own account.

Of the stories contained in the latter part of the volume, we like that
of the Whig and Jacobite friends, and of the good knight, Sir Alfred
Irthing, the best. The last reminded us of a fine sketch of a similar
character in the beautiful poem of _Hart Leap Well_. To conclude,—if the
skill with which the poet had chosen his materials had been equal to the
power which he has undeniably exerted over them, if the objects (whether
persons or things) which he makes use of as the vehicle of his
sentiments, had been such as to convey them in all their depth and
force, then the production before us might indeed ‘have proved a
monument,’ as he himself wishes it, worthy of the author, and of his
country. Whether, as it is, this very original and powerful performance
may not rather remain like one of those stupendous but half-finished
structures, which have been suffered to moulder into decay, because the
cost and labour attending them exceeded their use or beauty, we feel
that it would be presumptuous in us to determine.


 NO. 31.]                  CHARACTER OF THE LATE MR. PITT[61]

The character of Mr. Pitt was, perhaps, one of the most singular that
ever existed. With few talents, and fewer virtues, he acquired and
preserved, in one of the most trying situations, and in spite of all
opposition, the highest reputation for the possession of every moral
excellence, and as having carried the attainments of eloquence and
wisdom as far as human abilities could go. This he did (strange as it
may appear) by a negation (together with the common virtues) of the
common vices of human nature, and by the complete negation of every
other talent that might interfere with the only ones which he possessed
in a supreme degree, and which, indeed, may be made to include the
appearance of all others,—an artful use of words, and a certain
dexterity of logical arrangement. In these alone his power consisted;
and the defect of all other qualities, which usually constitute
greatness, contributed to the more complete success of these. Having no
strong feelings, no distinct perceptions,—his mind having no link, as it
were, to connect it with the world of external nature, every subject
presented to him nothing more than a _tabula rasa_, on which he was at
liberty to lay whatever colouring of language he pleased; having no
general principles, no comprehensive views of things, no moral habits of
thinking, no system of action, there was nothing to hinder him from
pursuing any particular purpose by any means that offered; having never
any plan, he could not be convicted of inconsistency, and his own pride
and obstinacy were the only rules of his conduct. Without insight into
human nature, without sympathy with the passions of men, or apprehension
of their real designs, he seemed perfectly insensible to the
consequences of things, and would believe nothing till it actually
happened. The fog and haze in which he saw every thing communicated
itself to others; and the total indistinctness and uncertainty of his
own ideas tended to confound the perceptions of his hearers more
effectually than the most ingenious misrepresentation could have done.
Indeed, in defending his conduct, he never seemed to consider himself as
at all responsible for the success of his measures, or to suppose that
future events were in our own power; but that, as the best-laid schemes
might fail, and there was no providing against all possible
contingencies, this was sufficient excuse for our plunging at once into
any dangerous or absurd enterprise without the least regard to
consequences. His reserved logic confined itself solely to the
_possible_ and the _impossible_, and he appeared to regard the
_probable_ and _improbable_, the only foundation of moral prudence or
political wisdom, as beneath the notice of a profound statesman; as if
the pride of the human intellect were concerned in never entrusting
itself with subjects, where it may be compelled to acknowledge its
weakness. Nothing could ever drive him out of his dull forms, and naked
generalities; which, as they are susceptible neither of degree nor
variation, are therefore equally applicable to every emergency that can
happen: and in the most critical aspect of affairs, he saw nothing but
the same flimsy web of remote possibilities and metaphysical
uncertainty. In his mind, the wholesome pulp of practical wisdom and
salutary advice was immediately converted into the dry chaff and husks
of a miserable logic. From his manner of reasoning, he seemed not to
have believed that the truth of his statements depended on the reality
of the facts, but that the facts themselves depended on the order in
which he arranged them in words: you would not suppose him to be
agitating a serious question, which had real grounds to go upon, but to
be declaiming upon an imaginary thesis, proposed as an exercise in the
schools. He never set himself to examine the force of the objections
that were brought against him, or attempted to defend his measures upon
clear, solid grounds of his own; but constantly contented himself with
first gravely stating the logical form, or dilemma to which the question
reduced itself; and then, after having declared his opinion, proceeded
to amuse his hearers by a series of rhetorical common-places, connected
together in grave, sonorous, and elaborately constructed periods,
without ever shewing their real application to the subject in dispute.
Thus, if any member of the opposition disapproved of any measure, and
enforced his objections by pointing out the many evils with which it was
fraught, or the difficulties attending its execution, his only answer
was, ‘that it was true there might be inconveniences attending the
measure proposed, but we were to remember, that every expedient that
could be devised might be said to be nothing more than a choice of
difficulties, and that all that human prudence could do, was to consider
on which side the advantages lay; that, for his part, he conceived that
the present measure was attended with more advantages and fewer
disadvantages than any other that could be adopted; that it we were
diverted from our object by every appearance of difficulty, the wheels
of government would be clogged by endless delays and imaginary
grievances; that most of the objections made to the measure appeared to
him to be trivial, others of them unfounded and improbable; or that, if
a scheme, free from all these objections, could be proposed, it might,
after all, prove inefficient; while, in the meantime, a material object
remained unprovided for, or the opportunity of action was lost.’ This
mode of reasoning is admirably described by Hobbes, in speaking of the
writings of some of the schoolmen, of whom he says that ‘they had
learned the trick of imposing what they list upon their readers, and
declining the force of true reason by verbal forks, that is,
distinctions, which signify nothing, but serve only to astonish the
multitude of ignorant men.’ That what we have here stated comprehends
the whole force of his mind, which consisted solely in this evasive
dexterity and perplexing formality, assisted by a copiousness of words
and common-place topics, will, we think, be evident to any one who
carefully looks over his speeches, undazzled by the reputation or
personal influence of the speaker. It will be in vain to look in them
for any of the common proofs of human genius or wisdom. He has not left
behind him a single memorable saying,—not one profound maxim,—one solid
observation,—one forcible description,—one beautiful thought,—one
humorous picture,—one affecting sentiment. He has made no addition
whatever to the stock of human knowledge. He did not possess any one of
those faculties which contribute to the instruction and delight of
mankind,—depth of understanding, imagination, sensibility, wit,
vivacity, clear and solid judgment. But it may be asked, If these
qualities are not to be found in him, where are we to look for them? and
we may be required to point out instances of them. We shall answer then,
that he had none of the abstract, legislative wisdom, refined sagacity,
or rich, impetuous, high-wrought imagination of Burke; the manly
eloquence, exact knowledge, vehemence, and natural simplicity of Fox;
the ease, brilliancy, and acuteness of Sheridan. It is not merely that
he had not all these qualities in the degree that they were severally
possessed by his rivals, but he had not any of them in any remarkable
degree. His reasoning is a technical arrangement of unmeaning
common-places, his eloquence rhetorical, his style monotonous and
artificial. If he could pretend to any one excellence more than another,
it was to taste in composition. There is certainly nothing low, nothing
puerile, nothing far-fetched or abrupt in his speeches; there is a kind
of faultless regularity pervading them throughout; but in the confined,
formal, passive mode of eloquence which he adopted, it seemed rather
more difficult to commit errors than to avoid them. A man who is
determined never to move out of the beaten road cannot lose his way.
However, habit, joined to the peculiar mechanical memory which he
possessed, carried this correctness to a degree which, in an
extemporaneous speaker, was almost miraculous; he, perhaps, hardly ever
uttered a sentence that was not perfectly regular and connected. In this
respect, he not only had the advantage over his own contemporaries, but
perhaps no one that ever lived equalled him in this singular faculty.
But for this, he would always have passed for a common man; and to this
the constant sameness, and, if we may so say, vulgarity of his ideas,
must have contributed not a little, as there was nothing to distract his
mind from this one object of his unintermitted attention; and as, even
in his choice of words, he never aimed at any thing more than a certain
general propriety and stately uniformity of style. His talents were
exactly fitted for the situation in which he was placed; where it was
his business not to overcome others, but to avoid being overcome. He was
able to baffle opposition, not from strength or firmness, but from the
evasive ambiguity and impalpable nature of his resistance, which gave no
hold to the rude grasp of his opponents: no force could bind the loose
phantom, and his mind (though ‘not matchless, and his pride humbled by
such rebuke’) soon rose from defeat unhurt,

               ‘And in its liquid texture, mortal wound
               Receiv’d no more than can the fluid air.’


 NO. 32.]                ON RELIGIOUS HYPOCRISY           [OCT. 9, 1814.

Religion either makes men wise and virtuous, or it makes them set up
false pretences to both. In the latter case, it makes them hypocrites to
themselves as well as others. Religion is, in grosser minds, an enemy to
self-knowledge. The consciousness of the presence of an all-powerful
Being, who is both the witness and judge of every thought, word, and
action, where it does not produce its proper effect, forces the
religious man to practise every mode of deceit upon himself with respect
to his real character and motives; for it is only by being wilfully
blind to his own faults, that he can suppose they will escape the eye of
Omniscience. Consequently, the whole business of a religious man’s life,
if it does not conform to the strict line of his duty, may be said to be
to gloss over his errors to himself, and to invent a thousand shifts and
palliations, in order to hoodwink the Almighty. While he is sensible of
his own delinquency, he knows that it cannot escape the penetration of
his invisible Judge; and the distant penalty annexed to every offence,
though not sufficient to make him desist from the commission of it, will
not suffer him to rest easy, till he has made some compromise with his
own conscience as to his motives for committing it. As far as relates to
this world, a cunning knave may take a pride in the imposition he
practises upon others; and, instead of striving to conceal his true
character from himself, may chuckle with inward satisfaction at the
folly of those who are not wise enough to detect it. ‘But ’tis not so
above.’ This shallow, skin-deep hypocrisy will not serve the turn of the
religious devotee, who is ‘compelled to give in evidence against
himself,’ and who must first become the dupe of his own imposture,
before he can flatter himself with the hope of concealment, as children
hide their eyes with their hands, and fancy that no one can see them.
Religious people often pray very heartily for the forgiveness of a
‘multitude of trespasses and sins,’ as a mark of their humility, but we
never knew them admit any one fault in particular, or acknowledge
themselves in the wrong in any instance whatever. The natural jealousy
of self-love is in them heightened by the fear of damnation, and they
plead _Not Guilty_ to every charge brought against them, with all the
conscious terrors of a criminal at the bar. It is for this reason that
the greatest hypocrites in the world are religious hypocrites.

This quality, as it has been sometimes found united with the clerical
character, is known by the name of _Priestcraft_. The Ministers of
Religion are perhaps more liable to this vice than any other class of
people. They are obliged to assume a greater degree of sanctity, though
they have it not, and to screw themselves up to an unnatural pitch of
severity and self-denial. They must keep a constant guard over
themselves, have an eye always to their own persons, never relax in
their gravity, nor give the least scope to their inclinations. A single
slip, if discovered, may be fatal to them. Their influence and
superiority depend on their pretensions to virtue and piety; and they
are tempted to draw liberally on the funds of credulity and ignorance
allotted for their convenient support. All this cannot be very friendly
to downright simplicity of character. Besides, they are so accustomed to
inveigh against the vices of others, that they naturally forget that
they have any of their own to correct. They see vice as an object always
out of themselves, with which they have no other concern than to
denounce and stigmatise it. They are only reminded of it _in the third
person_. They as naturally associate sin and its consequences with their
flocks as a pedagogue associates a false concord and flogging with his
scholars. If we may so express it, they serve as conductors to the
lightning of divine indignation, and have only to point the thunders of
the law at others. They identify themselves with that perfect system of
faith and morals, of which they are the professed teachers, and regard
any imputation on their conduct as an indirect attack on the function to
which they belong, or as compromising the authority under which they
act. It is only the head of the Popish church who assumes the title of
_God’s Vicegerent upon Earth_; but the feeling is nearly common to all
the oracular interpreters of the will of Heaven—from the successor of
St. Peter down to the simple, unassuming Quaker, who, disclaiming the
imposing authority of title and office, yet fancies himself the
immediate organ of a preternatural impulse, and affects to speak only as
the spirit moves him.

There is another way in which the formal profession of religion aids
hypocrisy, by erecting a secret tribunal, to which those who affect a
more than ordinary share of it can (in case of need) appeal from the
judgments of men. The religious impostor, reduced to his last shift, and
having no other way left to avoid the most ‘open and apparent shame,’
rejects the fallible decisions of the world, and thanks God that there
is one who knows the heart. He is amenable to a higher jurisdiction, and
while all is well with Heaven, he can pity the errors, and smile at the
malice of his enemies! Whatever cuts men off from their dependence on
common opinion or obvious appearances, must open a door to evasion and
cunning, by setting up a standard of right and wrong in every one’s own
breast, of the truth of which nobody can judge but the person himself.
There are some fine instances in the old plays and novels (the best
commentaries on human nature) of the effect of this principle, in giving
the last finishing to the character of duplicity. Miss Harris, in
Fielding’s _Amelia_, is one of the most striking. Molière’s _Tartuffe_
is another instance of the facility with which religion may be perverted
to the purposes of the most flagrant hypocrisy. It is an impenetrable
fastness, to which this worthy person, like so many others, retires
without the fear of pursuit. It is an additional disguise, in which he
wraps himself up like a cloak. It is a stalking-horse, which is ready on
all occasions,—an invisible conscience, which goes about with him,—his
good genius, that becomes surety for him in all difficulties,—swears to
the purity of his motives,—extricates him out of the most desperate
circumstances,—baffles detection, and furnishes a plea to which there is
no answer.

The same sort of reasoning will account for the old remark, that persons
who are stigmatised as non-conformists to the established religion,
Jews, Presbyterians, etc., are more disposed to this vice than their
neighbours. They are inured to the contempt of the world, and steeled
against its prejudices: and the same indifference which fortifies them
against the unjust censures of mankind, may be converted, as occasion
requires, into a screen for the most pitiful conduct. They have no
cordial sympathy with others, and, therefore, no sincerity in their
intercourse with them. It is the necessity of concealment, in the first
instance, that produces, and is, in some measure, an excuse for, the
habit of hypocrisy.

Hypocrisy, as it is connected with cowardice, seems to imply weakness of
body or want of spirit. The impudence and insensibility which belong to
it, ought to suppose robustness of constitution. There is certainly a
very successful and formidable class of sturdy, jolly, able-bodied
hypocrites, the Friar Johns of the profession. Raphael has represented
Elymas the Sorcerer, with a hard iron visage, and large uncouth figure,
made up of bones and muscles; as one not troubled with weak nerves or
idle scruples—as one who repelled all sympathy with others—who was not
to be jostled out of his course by their censures or suspicions—and who
could break with ease through the cobweb snares which he had laid for
the credulity of others, without being once entangled in his own
delusions. His outward form betrays the hard, unimaginative, self-willed
understanding of the sorcerer.

                                                                      A.


 NO. 33.]               ON THE LITERARY CHARACTER        [OCT. 28, 1813.

The following remarks are prefixed to the account of Baron Grimm’s
Correspondence in a late number of a celebrated Journal:-

‘There is nothing more exactly painted in these graphical volumes, than
the character of M. Grimm himself; and the beauty of it is, that, as
there is nothing either natural or peculiar about it, it may stand for
the character of all the wits and philosophers he frequented. He had
more wit, perhaps, and more sound sense and information, than the
greatest part of the society in which he lived; but the leading traits
belong to the whole class, and to all classes, indeed, in similar
situations, in every part of the world. Whenever there is a very large
assemblage of persons who have no other occupation but to amuse
themselves, there will infallibly be generated acuteness of intellect,
refinement of manners, and good taste in conversation; and, with the
same certainty, all profound thought, and all serious affection, will be
discarded from their society.

‘The multitude of persons and things that force themselves on the
attention in such a scene, and the rapidity with which they succeed each
other, and pass away, prevent any one from making a deep or permanent
impression; and the mind, having never been tasked to any course of
application, and long habituated to this lively succession and variety
of objects, comes at last to require the excitement of perpetual change,
and to find a multiplicity of friends as indispensable as a multiplicity
of amusements. Thus the characteristics of large and polished society
come almost inevitably to be, wit and heartlessness—acuteness and
perpetual derision. The same impatience of uniformity, and passion for
variety, which give so much grace to their conversation, by excluding
all tediousness and pertinacious wrangling, make them incapable of
dwelling for many minutes on the feelings and concerns of any one
individual; while the constant pursuit of little gratifications, and the
weak dread of all uneasy sensations, render them equally averse from
serious sympathy and deep thought.

‘The whole style and tone of this publication affords the most striking
illustration of these general remarks. From one end of it to the other,
it is a display of the most complete heartlessness, and the most
uninterrupted levity. It chronicles the deaths of half the author’s
acquaintance, and makes jests upon them all; and is much more serious in
discussing the merits of an opera-dancer, than in considering the
evidence for the being of a God, or the first foundations of morality.
Nothing, indeed, can be more just or conclusive than the remark that is
forced from M. Grimm himself, upon the utter carelessness, and instant
oblivion, that followed the death of one of the most distinguished,
active, and amiable members of his coterie: “Tant il est vrai que ce que
nous appelons _la société_, est ce qu’il y a de plus léger, plus ingrat,
et de plus frivole au monde!”’

These remarks, though shrewd and sensible in themselves, apply rather to
the character of M. Grimm and his friends as men of the world, after
their initiation into the refined society of Paris and the great world,
than as mere men of letters. There is, however, a character which every
man of letters has before he comes into society, and which he carries
into the world with him, which we shall here attempt to describe.

The weaknesses and vices that arise from a constant intercourse with
books, are in certain respects the same with those which arise from
daily intercourse with the world; yet each has a character and operation
of its own, which may either counteract or aggravate the tendency of the
other. The same dissipation of mind, the same listlessness, languor, and
indifference, may be produced by both, but they are produced in
different ways, and exhibit very different appearances. The defects of
the literary character proceed, not from frivolity and voluptuous
indolence, but from the overstrained exertion of the faculties, from
abstraction and refinement. A man without talents or education might
mingle in the same society, might give in to all the gaiety and foppery
of the age, might see the same ‘multiplicity of persons and things,’ but
would not become a wit and a philosopher for all that. As far as the
change of actual objects, the real variety and dissipation goes, there
is no difference between M. Grimm and a courtier of Francis I.—between
the consummate philosopher and the giddy girl—between Paris, amidst the
barbaric refinements of the middle of the eighteenth century, and any
other metropolis at any other period. It is in the _ideal_ change of
objects, in the _intellectual_ dissipation of literature and of literary
society, that we are to seek for the difference. The very same languor
and listlessness which, in fashionable life, are owing to the rapid
‘succession of persons and things,’ may be found, and even in a more
intense degree, in the most recluse student, who has no knowledge
whatever of the great world, who has never been present at the sallies
of a _petit souper_, or complimented a lady on presenting her with a
bouquet. It is the province of literature to anticipate the dissipation
of real objects, and to increase it. It creates a fictitious
restlessness and craving after variety, by creating a fictitious world
around us, and by hurrying us, not only through all the mimic scenes of
life, but by plunging us into the endless labyrinths of imagination.
Thus the common indifference produced by the distraction of successive
amusements, is superseded by a general indifference to surrounding
objects, to real persons and things, occasioned by the disparity between
the world of our imagination and that without us. The scenes of real
life are not got up in the same style of magnificence; they want
dramatic illusion and effect. The high-wrought feelings require all the
concomitant and romantic circumstances which fancy can bring together to
satisfy them, and cannot find them in any given object. M. Grimm was
not, by his own account, _born_ a lover; but even supposing him to have
been, in gallantry of temper, a very Amadis, would it have been
necessary that the enthusiasm of a philosopher and a man of genius
should have run the gauntlet of all the _bonnes fortunes_ of Paris to
evaporate into insensibility and indifference? Would not a Clarissa, a
new Eloise, a Cassandra, or a Berenice, have produced the same
mortifying effects on a person of his great critical and acumen and
virtù? Where, O where would he find the rocks of Meillerie in the
precincts of the Palais Royal, or on what lips would Julia’s kisses
grow? Who, after wandering with Angelica, or having seen the heavenly
face of Una, might not meet with impunity a whole circle of literary
ladies? Cowley’s mistresses reigned by turns in the poet’s fancy, and
the beauties of King Charles II. perplex the eye in the preference of
their charms as much now as they ever did. One trifling coquette only
drives out another; but Raphael’s Galatea kills the whole race of
pertness and vulgarity at once. After ranging in dizzy mazes, through
the regions of imaginary beauty, the mind sinks down, breathless and
exhausted, on the earth. In common minds, indifference is produced by
mixing with the world. Authors and artists bring it into the world with
them. The disappointment of the ideal enthusiast is indeed greatest at
first, and he grows reconciled to his situation by degrees; whereas the
mere man of the world becomes more dissatisfied and fastidious, and more
of a misanthrope, the longer he lives.

It is much the same in friendships founded on literary motives. Literary
men are not attached to the persons of their friends, but to their
minds. They look upon them in the same light as on the books in their
library, and read them till they are tired. In casual acquaintances
friendship grows out of habit. Mutual kindnesses beget mutual
attachment; and numberless little local occurrences in the course of a
long intimacy, furnish agreeable topics of recollection, and are almost
the only sources of conversation among such persons. They have an
immediate pleasure in each other’s company. But in literature nothing of
this kind takes place. Petty and local circumstances are beneath the
dignity of philosophy. Nothing will go down but wit or wisdom. The mind
is kept in a perpetual state of violent exertion and expectation, and as
there cannot always be a fresh supply of stimulus to excite it, as the
same remarks or the same _bon mots_ come to be often repeated, or others
so like them, that we can easily anticipate the effect, and are no
longer surprised into admiration, we begin to relax in the frequency of
our visits, and the heartiness of our welcome. When we are tired of a
book we can lay it down, but we cannot so easily put our friends on the
shelf when we grow weary of their society. The necessity of keeping up
appearances, therefore, adds to the dissatisfaction on both sides, and
at length irritates indifference into contempt.

By the help of arts and science, everything finds an ideal level. Ideas
assume the place of realities, and realities sink into nothing. Actual
events and objects produce little or no effect on the mind, when it has
been long accustomed to draw its strongest interest from constant
contemplation. It is necessary that it should, as it were, recollect
itself—that it should call out its internal resources, and refine upon
its own feelings—place the object at a distance, and embellish it at
pleasure. By degrees all things are made to serve as hints, and
occasions for the exercise of intellectual activity. It was on this
principle that the sentimental Frenchman left his Mistress, in order
that he might think of her. Cicero ceased to mourn for the loss of his
daughter, when he recollected how fine an opportunity it would afford
him to write an eulogy to her memory; and Mr. Shandy lamented over the
death of Master Bobby much in the same manner. The insensibility of
Authors, etc., to domestic and private calamities has been often carried
to a ludicrous excess, but it is less than it appears to be. The genius
of philosophy is not yet _quite_ understood. For instance, the man who
might seem at the moment undisturbed by the death of a wife or mistress,
would perhaps never walk out on a fine evening as long as he lived,
without recollecting her; and a disappointment in love that ‘heaves no
sigh and sheds no tear,’ may penetrate to the heart, and remain fixed
there ever after. _Hæret lateri lethalis arundo._ The blow is felt only
by reflection, the rebound is fatal. Our feelings become more ideal; the
impression of the moment is less violent, but the effect is more general
and permanent. Those whom we love best, take nearly the same rank in our
estimation as the heroine of a favourite novel! Indeed, after all,
compared with the genuine feelings of nature, ‘clad in flesh and blood,’
with real passions and affections, conversant about real objects, the
life of a mere man of letters and sentiment appears to be at best but a
living death; a dim twilight existence: a sort of wandering about in an
Elysian fields of our own making; a refined, spiritual, disembodied
state, like that of the ghosts of Homer’s heroes, who, we are told,
would gladly have exchanged situations with the meanest peasant upon
earth![62]

The moral character of men of letters depends very much upon the same
principles. All actions are seen through that general medium which
reduces them to individual insignificance. Nothing fills or engrosses
the mind—nothing seems of sufficient importance to interfere with our
present inclination. Prejudices, as well as attachments, lose their hold
upon us, and we palter with our duties as we please. Moral obligations,
by being perpetually refined upon, and discussed, lose their force and
efficacy, become mere dry distinctions of the understanding,

           ‘Play round the head, but never reach the heart.’

Opposite reasons and consequences balance one another, while appetite or
interest turns the scale. Hence the severe sarcasm of Rousseau, ‘_Tout
homme reflechi est mechant_.’ In fact, it must be confessed, that, as
all things produce their extremes, so excessive refinement tends to
produce equal grossness. The tenuity of our intellectual desires leaves
a void in the mind which requires to be filled up by coarser
gratification, and that of the senses is always at hand. They alone
always retain their strength. There is not a greater mistake than the
common supposition, that intellectual pleasures are capable of endless
repetition, and physical ones not so. The one, indeed, may be spread out
over a greater surface, they may be dwelt upon and kept in mind at will,
and for that very reason they wear out, and pall by comparison, and
require perpetual variety. Whereas the physical gratification only
occupies us at the moment, is, as it were, absorbed in itself, and
forgotten as soon as it is over, and when it returns is _as good as
new_. No one could ever read the same book for any length of time
without being tired of it, but a man is never tired of his meals,
however little variety his table may have to boast. This reasoning is
equally true of all persons who have given much of their time to study
and abstracted speculations. Grossness and sensuality have been marked
with no less triumph in the religious devotee than in the professed
philosopher. The perfect joys of heaven do not satisfy the cravings of
nature; and the good Canon in Gil Blas might be opposed with effect to
some of the portraits in M. Grimm’s Correspondence.

                                                                   T. T.


 NO. 34.]                ON COMMON-PLACE CRITICS         [NOV. 24, 1816.

           ‘Nor can I think what thoughts they can conceive.’

We have already given some account of common-place people; we shall in
this number attempt a description of another class of the community, who
may be called (by way of distinction) common-place critics. The former
are a set of people who have no opinions of their own, and do not
pretend to have any; the latter are a set of people who have no opinions
of their own, but who affect to have one upon every subject you can
mention. The former are a very honest, good sort of people, who are
contented to pass for what they are; the latter are a very pragmatical,
troublesome sort of people, who would pass for what they are not, and
try to put off their common-place notions in all companies and on all
subjects, as something of their own. They are of both species, the grave
and the gay; and it is hard to say which is the most tiresome.

A common-place critic has something to say upon every occasion, and he
always tells you either what is not true, or what you knew before, or
what is not worth knowing. He is a person who thinks by proxy, and talks
by rote. He differs with you, not because he thinks you are in the
wrong, but because he thinks somebody else will think so. Nay, it would
be well if he stopped here; but he will undertake to misrepresent you by
anticipation, lest others should misunderstand you, and will set you
right, not only in opinions which you have, but in those which you may
be supposed to have. Thus, if you say that _Bottom_ the weaver is a
character that has not had justice done to it, he shakes his head, is
afraid you will be thought extravagant, and wonders you should think the
_Midsummer Night’s Dream_ the finest of all Shakspeare’s plays. He
judges of matters of taste and reasoning as he does of dress and
fashion, by the prevailing tone of good company; and you would as soon
persuade him to give up any sentiment that is current there, as to wear
the hind part of his coat before. By the best company, of which he is
perpetually talking, he means persons who live on their own estates, and
other people’s ideas. By the opinion of the world, to which he pays and
expects you to pay great deference, he means that of a little circle of
his own, where he hears and is heard. Again, _good sense_ is a phrase
constantly in his mouth, by which he does not mean his own sense or that
of anybody else, but the opinions of a number of persons who have agreed
to take their opinions on trust from others. If any one observes that
there is something better than common sense, viz., _uncommon_ sense, he
thinks this a bad joke. If you object to the opinions of the majority,
as often arising from ignorance or prejudice, he appeals from them to
the sensible and well-informed; and if you say there may be other
persons as sensible and well informed as himself and his friends, he
smiles at your presumption. If you attempt to prove anything to him, it
is in vain, for he is not thinking of what you say, but of what will be
thought of it. The stronger your reasons, the more incorrigible he
thinks you; and he looks upon any attempt to expose his gratuitous
assumptions as the wandering of a disordered imagination. His notions
are like plaster figures cast in a mould, as brittle as they are hollow;
but they will break before you can make them give way. In fact, he is
the representative of a large part of the community, the shallow, the
vain, and indolent, of those who have time to talk, and are not bound to
think: and he considers any deviation from the select forms of
common-place, or the accredited language of conventional impertinence,
as compromising the authority under which he acts in his diplomatic
capacity. It is wonderful how this class of people agree with one
another; how they herd together in all their opinions; what a tact they
have for folly; what an instinct for absurdity; what a sympathy in
sentiment; how they find one another out by infallible signs, like
Freemasons! The secret of this unanimity and strict accord is, that not
any one of them ever admits any opinion that can cost the least effort
of mind in arriving at, or of courage in declaring it. Folly is as
consistent with itself as wisdom: there is a certain level of thought
and sentiment, which the weakest minds, as well as the strongest, find
out as best adapted to them; and you as regularly come to the same
conclusions, by looking no farther than the surface, as if you dug to
the centre of the earth! You know beforehand what a critic of this class
will say on almost every subject the first time he sees you, the next
time, the time after that, and so on to the end of the chapter. The
following list of his opinions may be relied on:—It is pretty certain
that before you have been in the room with him ten minutes, he will give
you to understand that Shakspeare was a great but irregular genius.
Again, he thinks it a question whether any one of his plays, if brought
out now for the first time, would succeed. He thinks that _Macbeth_
would be the most likely, from the music which has been since introduced
into it. He has some doubts as to the superiority of the French School
over us in tragedy, and observes, that Hume and Adam Smith were both of
that opinion. He thinks Milton’s pedantry a great blemish in his
writings, and that _Paradise Lost_ has many prosaic passages in it. He
conceives that genius does not always imply taste, and that wit and
judgment are very different faculties. He considers Dr. Johnson as a
great critic and moralist, and that his Dictionary was a work of
prodigious erudition and vast industry; but that some of the anecdotes
of him in Boswell are trifling. He conceives that Mr. Locke was a very
original and profound thinker. He thinks Gibbon’s style vigorous but
florid. He wonders that the author of _Junius_ was never found out. He
thinks Pope’s translation of the _Iliad_ an improvement on the
simplicity of the original, which was necessary to fit it to the taste
of modern readers. He thinks there is a great deal of grossness in the
old comedies; and that there has been a great improvement in the morals
of the higher classes since the reign of Charles II. He thinks the reign
of Queen Anne the golden period of our literature, but that, upon the
whole, we have no English writer equal to Voltaire. He speaks of
Boccacio as a very licentious writer, and thinks the wit in Rabelais
quite extravagant, though he never read either of them. He cannot get
through Spenser’s _Fairy Queen_, and pronounces all allegorical poetry
tedious. He prefers Smollett to Fielding, and discovers more knowledge
of the world in _Gil Blas_ than in _Don Quixote_. Richardson he thinks
very minute and tedious. He thinks the French Revolution has done a
great deal of harm to the cause of liberty; and blames Buonaparte for
being so ambitious. He reads the _Edinburgh_ and _Quarterly Reviews_,
and thinks as they do. He is shy of having an opinion on a new actor or
a new singer; for the public do not always agree with the newspapers. He
thinks that the moderns have great advantages over the ancients in many
respects. He thinks Jeremy Bentham a greater man than Aristotle. He can
see no reason why artists of the present day should not paint as well as
Raphael or Titian. For instance, he thinks there is something very
elegant and classical in Mr. Westall’s drawings. He has no doubt that
Sir Joshua Reynolds’s Lectures were written by Burke. He considers Horne
Tooke’s account of the conjunction _That_ very ingenious, and holds that
no writer can be called elegant who uses the present for the subjunctive
mood, who says _If it is_ for _If it be_. He thinks Hogarth a great
master of low, comic humour; and Cobbett a coarse, vulgar writer. He
often talks of men of liberal education, and men without education, as
if that made much difference. He judges of people by their pretensions;
and pays attention to their opinions according to their dress and rank
in life. If he meets with a fool, he does not find him out; and if he
meets with any one wiser than himself, he does not know what to make of
him. He thinks that manners are of great consequence to the common
intercourse of life. He thinks it difficult to prove the existence of
any such thing as original genius, or to fix a general standard of
taste. He does not think it possible to define what wit is. In religion,
his opinions are liberal. He considers all enthusiasm as a degree of
madness, particularly to be guarded against by young minds; and believes
that truth lies in the middle, between the extremes of right and wrong.
He thinks that the object of poetry is to please; and that astronomy is
a very pleasing and useful study. He thinks all this, and a great deal
more, that amounts to nothing. We wonder we have remembered one half of
it—

              ‘For true no-meaning puzzles more than wit.’

Though he has an aversion to all new ideas, he likes all new plans and
matters-of-fact: the new Schools for All, the Penitentiary, the new
Bedlam, the new Steam-Boats, the Gas-Lights, the new Patent Blacking;
every thing of that sort but the Bible Society. The Society for the
Suppression of Vice he thinks a great nuisance, as every honest man
must.

In a word, a common-place critic is the pedant of polite conversation.
He refers to the opinion of Lord M. or Lady G. with the same air of
significance that the learned pedant does to the authority of Cicero or
Virgil; retails the wisdom of the day, as the anecdote-monger does the
wit; and carries about with him the sentiments of people of a certain
respectability in life, as the dancing-master does their air, or their
valets their clothes.

                                                                      Z.


 NO. 35.]           ON THE CATALOGUE RAISONNÉ OF THE     [NOV. 10, 1816.
                           BRITISH INSTITUTION

The Catalogue Raisonné of the pictures lately exhibited at the British
Institution is worthy of notice, both as it is understood to be a
declaration of the views of the Royal Academy, and as it contains some
erroneous notions with respect to art prevalent in this country. It sets
out with the following passages:—

‘The first resolution ever framed by the noblemen and gentlemen who met
to establish the British Institution, consists of the following
sentence, viz.:

‘“The _object_ of the establishment is to facilitate, by a Public
Exhibition, the _Sale_ of the productions of _British_ artists.”

‘Now, if the Directors had not felt quite certain as to the result of
the present Exhibition, (of the Flemish School), if they had not
perfectly satisfied themselves, that, instead of affording any, even the
least means of promoting _unfair and invidious comparisons, it would
produce abundant matter for exaltation to the living Artist_, can we
possibly imagine they, the foster-parents of British Art, would ever
have suffered such a display to have taken place? Certainly not. If they
had not foreseen and fully provided against _all such injurious
results_, by the deep and masterly manœuvre alluded to in our former
remarks, is it conceivable that the Directors would have acted in a way
so counter, so diametrically in opposition to this their fundamental and
leading principle? No, No! It is a position which all sense of respect
for their consistency will not suffer us to admit, which all feelings of
respect for their views forbid us to allow.

‘Is it at all to be wondered at, that, in an Exhibition such as this,
where nothing _like a patriotic desire_ to uphold the arts of their
country can possibly have place in the minds of the Directors, we should
attribute to them the desire of _holding up the old Masters to
derision_, inasmuch as good policy would allow? Is it to be wondered at,
that, when the Directors have the three-fold prospect, by so doing, of
estranging the silly and ignorant Collector from his false and senseless
infatuation for the _Black Masters_, of turning his _unjust preference_
from Foreign to British Art, and, by affording the living painters a
just encouragement, teach them to feel that becoming confidence in their
powers, which an acknowledgment of their merits entitles them to? Is it
to be wondered at, we say, that a little duplicity should have been
practised upon this occasion, that some of our ill-advised Collectors
and second-rate picture Amateurs should have been singled out as sheep
for the sacrifice, and _thus ingeniously_ made to pay unwilling homage
_to the talents of their countrymen_, through that very medium by which
they had previously been induced _to depreciate them_?’—‘If, in our wish
to please the Directors, we should, without mercy, damn all that
deserves damning, and effectually hide our admiration for those pieces
and passages which are truly entitled to admiration, it must be placed
entirely to that _patriotic sympathy_, which we feel in common with the
Directors, of holding up to the public, as the first and great object,
THE PATRONAGE OF MODERN ART.’

Once more:

‘Who does not perceive (except those whose eyes are not made for seeing
more than they are told by others) that Vandyke’s portraits, by the
brilliant colour of the velvet hangings, are made to look as if they had
been newly fetched home from the clear-starcher, with a double portion
of blue in their ruffs? Who does not see, that the angelic females in
Rubens’s pictures (particularly in that of the Brazen Serpent) labour
under a fit of the bile, twice as severe as they would do, if they were
not suffering on red velvet? Who does not see, from the same cause, that
the landscapes by the same Master are converted into _brown studies_,
and that Rembrandt’s ladies and gentlemen of fashion look as if they had
been on duty for the whole of last week in the Prince Regent’s new
sewer? _And who, that has any penetration, that has any gratitude, does
not see, in seeing all this, the anxious and benevolent solicitude of
the Directors to keep the old masters under?_’

So, then, this Writer would think it a matter of lively gratitude, and
of exultation in the breasts of living Artists, if the Directors, ‘in
their anxious and benevolent desire to keep the old Masters under,’ had
contrived to make Vandyke’s pictures look like starch and blue: if they
had converted Rubens’s pictures into brown studies, or a fit of the
bile; or had dragged Rembrandt’s through the Prince Regent’s new sewers.
It would have been a great gain, a great triumph to the Academy and to
the Art, to have nothing left of all the pleasure or admiration which
those painters had hitherto imparted to the world, to find all the
excellences which their works had been supposed to possess, and all
respect for them in the minds of the public destroyed, and converted
into sudden loathing and disgust. This is, according to the
Catalogue-writer and his friends, a consummation devoutly to be wished
for themselves and for the Art. All that is taken from the old Masters
is so much added to the moderns; the marring of Art is the making of the
Academy. This is the kind of patronage and promotion of the Fine Arts on
which he insists as necessary to keep up the reputation of living
Artists, and to ensure the sale of their works. There is nothing then in
common between the merits of the old Masters and the doubtful claims of
the new: _those_ are not ‘the scale by which we can ascend to the love’
of these. The excellences of the latter are of their own making and of
their own seeing; we must take their own word for them; and not only so,
but we must sacrifice all established principles and all established
reputation to their upstart pretensions, because, if the old pictures
are not totally worthless, their own can be good for nothing. The only
chance, therefore, for the moderns, if the Catalogue-writer is to be
believed, is to decry all the _chef-d’œuvres_ of the Art, and to hold up
all the great names in it to derision. If the public once get to relish
the style of the old Masters, they will no longer tolerate theirs. But
so long as the old Masters can be _kept under_, the coloured caricatures
of the moderns, like _Mrs. Peachum’s_ coloured handkerchiefs, ‘will be
of sure sale at their warehouse at Redriff.’ The Catalogue-writer thinks
it necessary, in order to raise the Art in this country, to depreciate
all Art in all other times and countries. He thinks that the way to
excite an enthusiastic admiration of genius in the public is by setting
the example of a vulgar and malignant hatred of it in himself. He thinks
to inspire a lofty spirit of emulation in the rising generation, by
shutting his eyes to the excellences of all the finest models, or by
pouring out upon them the overflowings of his gall and envy, to
disfigure them in the eyes of others; so that they may see nothing in
Raphael, in Titian, in Rubens, in Rembrandt, in Vandyke, in Claude
Lorraine, in Leonardo da Vinci, but the low wit and dirty imagination of
a paltry scribbler; and come away from the greatest monuments of human
capacity, without one feeling of excellence in art, or of beauty or
grandeur in nature. Nay, he would persuade us that this is a great
public and private benefit, _viz._, that there is no such thing as
excellence, as genius, as true fame, except what he and his anonymous
associates arrogate to themselves, with all the profit and credit of
this degradation of genius, this ruin of Art, this obloquy and contempt
heaped on great and unrivalled reputation. He thinks it a likely mode of
producing confidence in the existence and value of Art, to prove that
there never was any such thing, till the last annual Exhibition of the
Royal Academy. He would encourage a disinterested love of Art, and a
liberal patronage of it in the great and opulent, by shewing that the
living Artists have no regard, but the most sovereign and reckless
contempt for it, except as it can be made a temporary stalking-horse to
their pride and avarice. The writer may have a _patriotic sympathy_ with
the sale of modern works of Art, but we do not see what sympathy there
can be between the buyers and sellers of these works, except in the love
of the Art itself. When we find that these patriotic persons would
destroy the Art itself to promote the sale of their pictures, we know
what to say to them. We are obliged to the zeal of our critic for having
set this matter in so clear a light. The public will feel little
sympathy with a body of Artists who disclaim all sympathy with all other
Artists. They will doubt their pretensions to genius who have no feeling
of respect for it in others; they will consider them as bastards, not
children of the Art, who would destroy their parent. The public will
hardly consent, when the proposition is put to them in this tangible
shape, to give up the cause of liberal art and of every liberal
sentiment connected with it, and enter, with their eyes open, into a
pettifogging cabal to keep the old Masters under, or hold their names up
to derision ‘as good sport,’ merely to gratify the selfish importunity
of a gang of sturdy beggars, who demand public encouragement and
support, with a claim of settlement in one hand, and a forged
certificate of merit in the other. They can only deserve well of the
public by deserving well of the Art. Have we taken these men from the
plough, from the counter, from the shop-board, from the tap-room and the
stable-door, to raise them to fortune, to rank, and distinction in life,
for the sake of Art, to give them a chance of doing something in Art
like what had been done before them, of promoting and refining the
public taste, of setting before them the great models of Art, and by a
pure love of truth and beauty, and by patient and disinterested
aspirations after it, of rising to the highest excellence, and of making
themselves ‘a name great above all names’; and do they now turn round
upon us, and because they have neglected these high objects of their
true calling for pitiful cabals and filling their pockets, insist that
we shall league with them in crushing the progress of Art, and the
respect attached to all its great efforts? There is no other country in
the world in which such a piece of impudent quackery could be put
forward with impunity, and still less in which it could be put forward
in the garb of patriotism. This is the effect of our gross island
manners. The Catalogue-writer carries his bear-garden notions of this
virtue into the Fine Arts, and would set about destroying Dutch or
Italian pictures as he would Dutch shipping or Italian liberty. He goes
up to the Rembrandts with the same swaggering Jack-tar airs as he would
to a battery of nine-pounders, and snaps his fingers at Raphael as he
would at the French. Yet he talks big about the Elgin Marbles, because
Mr. Payne Knight has made a slip on that subject; though, to be
consistent, he ought to be for pounding them in a mortar, should get his
friend the Incendiary to set fire to the room building for them at the
British Museum, or should get Mr. Soane to build it. Patriotism and the
Fine Arts have nothing to do with one another—because patriotism relates
to exclusive advantages, and the advantages of the Fine Arts are not
exclusive, but communicable. The physical property of one country cannot
be shared without loss by another: the physical force of one country may
destroy that of another. These, therefore, are objects of national
jealousy and fear of encroachment: for the interests or rights of
different countries may be compromised in them. But it is not so in the
Fine Arts, which depend upon taste and knowledge. We do not consume the
works of Art as articles of food, of clothing, or fuel; but we brood
over their _idea_, which is accessible to all, and may be multiplied
without end, ‘with riches fineless.’ Patriotism is ‘beastly; subtle as
the fox for prey; like warlike as the wolf for what it eats’; but Art is
ideal, and therefore liberal. The knowledge or perfection of Art in one
age or country is the cause of its existence or perfection in another.
Art is the cause of art in other men. Works of genius done by a Dutchman
are the cause of genius in an Englishman—are the cause of taste in an
Englishman. The patronage of foreign Art is, not to prevent, but to
promote Art in England. It does not prevent, but promote taste in
England. Art subsists by communication, not by exclusion. The light of
art, like that of nature, shines on all alike; and its benefit, like
that of the sun, is in being seen and felt. The spirit of art is not the
spirit of trade: it is not a question between the grower or consumer of
some perishable and personal commodity: but it is a question between
human genius and human taste, how much the one can produce for the
benefit of mankind, and how much the other can enjoy. It is ‘the link of
peaceful commerce ‘twixt dividable shores.’ To take from it this
character is to take from it its best privilege, its humanity. Would any
one, except our Catalogue-virtuoso, think of destroying or concealing
the monuments of Art in past ages, as inconsistent with the progress of
taste and civilisation in the present? Would any one find fault with the
introduction of the works of Raphael into this country, as if their
being done by an Italian confined the benefit to a foreign country, when
all the benefit, all the great and lasting benefit, (except the
purchase-money, the lasting burden of the Catalogue, and the great test
of the value of Art in the opinion of the writer), is instantly
communicated to all eyes that behold, and all hearts that can feel them?
It is many years ago since we first saw the prints of the Cartoons hung
round the parlour of a little inn on the great north road. We were then
very young, and had not been initiated into the principles of taste and
refinement of the _Catalogue Raisonné_. We had heard of the fame of the
Cartoons, but this was the first time that we had ever been admitted
face to face into the presence of those divine works. ‘How were we then
uplifted!’ Prophets and Apostles stood before us, and the Saviour of the
Christian world, with his attributes of faith and power; miracles were
working on the walls; the hand of Raphael was there, and as his pencil
traced the lines, we saw god-like spirits and lofty shapes descend and
walk visibly the earth, but as if their thoughts still lifted them above
the earth. There was that figure of St. Paul, pointing with noble
fervour to ‘temples not made with hands, eternal in the heavens,’ and
that finer one of Christ in the boat, whose whole figure seems sustained
by meekness and love, and that of the same person, surrounded by the
disciples, like a flock of sheep listening to the music of some divine
shepherd. We knew not how enough to admire them. If from this transport
and delight there arose in our breasts a wish, a deep aspiration of
mingled hope and fear, to be able one day to do something like them,
that hope has long since vanished; but not with it the love of Art, nor
delight in works of Art, nor admiration of the genius which produces
them, nor respect for fame which rewards and crowns them! Did we suspect
that in this feeling of enthusiasm for the works of Raphael we were
deficient in patriotic sympathy, or that, in spreading it as far as we
could, we did an injury to our country or to living Art? The very
feeling shewed that there was no such distinction in Art, that her
benefits were common, that the power of genius, like the spirit of the
world, is everywhere alike present. And would the harpies of criticism
try to extinguish this common benefit to their country from a pretended
exclusive attachment to their countrymen? Would they rob their country
of Raphael to set up the credit of their professional little-goes and E.
O. tables—‘cutpurses of the Art, that from the shelf the precious diadem
stole, and put it in their pockets’? Tired of exposing such folly, we
walked out the other day, and saw a bright cloud resting on the bosom of
the blue expanse, which reminded us of what we had seen in some picture
in the Louvre. We were suddenly roused from our reverie, by recollecting
that till we had answered this catchpenny publication we had no right,
without being liable to a charge of disaffection to our country or
treachery to the Art, to look at nature, or to think of any thing like
it in Art, not of British growth and manufacture!


 NO. 36.]              THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED          [NOV. 10, 17,
                                                                   1816.

The Catalogue-writer nicknames the Flemish painters ‘the Black Masters.’
Either this means that the works of Rubens and Vandyke were originally
black pictures, that is, deeply shadowed like those of Rembrandt, which
is false, there being no painter who used so little shadow as Vandyke,
or so much colour as Rubens; or it must mean that their pictures have
turned darker with time, that is, that the art itself is a black art. Is
this a triumph for the Academy? Is the defect and decay of Art a subject
of exultation to the national genius? Then there is no hope (in this
country at least) ‘that a great man’s memory may outlive him half a
year!’ Do they calculate that the decomposition and gradual
disappearance of the standard works of Art will quicken the demand, and
facilitate the sale of modern pictures? Have they no hope of immortality
themselves, that they are glad to see the inevitable dissolution of all
that has long flourished in splendour and in honour? They are pleased to
find, that at the end of near two hundred years, the pictures of Vandyke
and Rubens have suffered half as much from time as those of their late
President have done in thirty or forty, or their own in the last ten or
twelve years. So that the glory of painting is that it does not last for
ever: it is this which puts the ancients and the moderns on a level.
They hail with undisguised satisfaction the approaches of the slow
mouldering hand of time in those works which have lasted longest, not
anticipating the premature fate of their own. Such is their
short-sighted ambition. A picture is with them like the frame it is in,
_as good as new_; and the best picture, that which was last painted.
They make the weak side of Art the test of its excellence; and though a
modern picture of two years standing is hardly fit to be seen, from the
general ignorance of the painter in the mechanical as well as other
parts of the Art, yet they are sure at any time to get the start of
Rubens or Vandyke, by painting a picture against the day of exhibition.
We even question whether they would wish to make their own pictures last
if they could, and whether they would not destroy their own works as
well as those of others, (like chalk figures on the floors), to have new
ones bespoke the next day. The Flemish pictures then, except those of
Rembrandt, were not originally black; they have not faded in proportion
to the length of time they have been painted. All that comes then of the
nickname in the Catalogue is, that the pictures of the old Masters have
lasted longer than those of the present members of the Royal Academy,
and that the latter, it is to be presumed, do not wish their works to
last so long, lest they should be called the _Black Masters_. With
respect to Rembrandt, this epitaph may be literally true. But, we would
ask, whether the style of _chiaroscuro_, in which Rembrandt painted, is
not one fine view of nature and of art? Whether any other painter
carried it to the same height of perfection as he did? Whether any other
painter ever joined the same depth of shadow with the same clearness?
Whether his tones were not as fine as they were true? Whether a more
thorough master of his art ever lived? Whether he deserved for this to
be nicknamed by the Writer of the Catalogue, or to have his works ‘kept
under, or himself held up to derision,’ by the Patrons and Directors of
the British Institution for the support and encouragement of the Fine
Arts?

But we have heard it said by a disciple and commentator on the
Catalogue, (one would think it was hardly possible to descend lower than
the writer himself), that the Directors of the British Institution
assume a consequence to themselves, hostile to the pretensions of modern
professors, out of the reputation of the old Masters, whom they affect
to look upon with wonder, to worship as something preternatural;—that
they consider the bare possession of an old picture as a title to
distinction, and the respect paid to Art as the highest pretension of
the owner. And is this then a subject of complaint with the Academy,
that genius is thus thought of, when its claims are once fully
established? That those high qualities, which are beyond the estimate of
ignorance and selfishness while living, receive their reward from
distant ages? Do they not ‘feel the future in the instant’? Do they not
know, that those qualities which appeal neither to interest nor passion
can only find their level with time, and would they annihilate the only
pretensions they have? Or have they no conscious affinity with true
genius, no claim to the reversion of true fame, no right of succession
to this lasting inheritance and final reward of great exertions, which
they would therefore destroy, to prevent others from enjoying it? Does
all their ambition begin and end in their _patriotic sympathy_ with the
sale of modern works of Art, and have they no fellow-feeling with the
hopes and final destiny of human genius? What poet ever complained of
the respect paid to Homer as derogatory to himself? The envy and
opposition to established fame is peculiar to the race of modern
Artists; and it is to be hoped it will remain so. It is the fault of
their education. It is only by a liberal education that we learn to feel
respect for the past, or to take an interest in the future. The
knowledge of Artists is too often confined to their art, and their views
to their own interest. Even in this they are wrong:—in all respects they
are wrong. As a mere matter of trade, the prejudice in favour of old
pictures does not prevent but assist the sale of modern works of Art. If
there was not a prejudice in favour of old pictures, there could be a
prejudice in favour of none, and none would be sold. The professors seem
to think, that for every old picture not sold, one of their own would
be. This is a false calculation. The contrary is true. For every old
picture not sold, one of their own (in proportion) would _not_ be sold.
The practice of buying pictures is a habit, and it must begin with those
pictures which have a character and name, and not with those which have
none. ‘Depend upon it,’ says Mr. Burke in a letter to Barry, ‘whatever
attracts public attention to the Arts, will in the end be for the
benefit of the Artists themselves.’ Again, do not the Academicians know,
that it is a contradiction in terms, that a man should enjoy the
advantages of posthumous fame in his lifetime? Most men cease to be of
any consequence at all when they are dead; but it is the privilege of
the man of genius to survive himself. But he cannot in the nature of
things anticipate this privilege—because in all that appeals to the
general intellect of mankind, this appeal is strengthened, as it spreads
wider and is acknowledged; because a man cannot unite in himself
personally the suffrages of distant ages and nations; because
popularity, a newspaper puff, cannot have the certainty of lasting fame;
because it does not carry the same weight of sympathy with it; because
it cannot have the same interest, the same refinement or grandeur. If
Mr. West was equal to Raphael, (which he is not), if Mr. Lawrence was
equal to Vandyke or Titian, (which he is not), if Mr. Turner was equal
to Claude Lorraine, (which he is not), if Mr. Wilkie was equal to
Teniers, (which he is not), yet they could not, nor ought they to be
thought of in the same manner, because there could not be the same proof
of it, nor the same confidence in the opinion of a man and his friends,
or of any one generation, as in that of successive generations and the
voice of posterity. If it is said that we pass over the faults of the
one, and severely scrutinise the excellences of the other; this is also
right and necessary, because the one have passed their trial, and the
others are upon it. If we forgive or overlook the faults of the
ancients, it is because they have dearly earned it at our hands. We
ought to have some objects to indulge our enthusiasm upon; and we ought
to indulge it upon the highest, and those that are surest of deserving
it. Would one of our Academicians expect us to look at his new house in
one of the new squares with the same veneration as at Michael Angelo’s,
which he built with his own hands, as at Tully’s villa, or at the tomb
of Virgil? We have no doubt they would, but we cannot. Besides, if it
were possible to transfer our old prejudices to new candidates, the way
to effect this is not by destroying them. If we have no confidence in
all that has gone before us, in what has received the sanction of time
and the concurring testimony of disinterested judges, are we to believe
all of a sudden that excellence has started up in our own times, because
it never existed before: are we to take the Artists’ own word for their
superiority to their predecessors? There is one other plea made by the
moderns, ‘that they must live,’ and the answer to it is, that they do
live. An Academician makes his thousand a-year by portrait-painting, and
complains that the encouragement given to foreign Art deprives him of
the means of subsistence, and prevents him from indulging his genius in
works of high history,—‘playing at will his virgin fancies wild.’

As to the comparative merits of the ancients and the moderns, it does
not admit of a question. The odds are too much in favour of the former,
because it is likely that more good pictures were painted in the last
three hundred than in the last thirty years. Now, the old pictures are
the best remaining out of all that period, setting aside those of living
Artists. If they are bad, the Art itself is good for nothing; for they
are the best that ever were. They are not good, because they are old;
but they have become old, because they are good. The question is not
between this and any other generation, but between the present and all
preceding generations, whom the Catalogue-writer, in his misguided zeal,
undertakes to vilify and ‘to keep under, or hold up to derision.’ To say
that the great names which have come down to us are not worth any thing,
is to say that the mountain-tops which we see in the farthest horizon
are not so high as the intervening objects. If there had been any
greater painters than Vandyke or Rubens, or Raphael or Rembrandt, or N.
Poussin or Claude Lorraine, we should have heard of them, we should have
seen them in the Gallery, and we should have read a patriotic and
disinterested account of them in the _Catalogue Raisonné_. Waiving the
unfair and invidious comparison between all former excellence and the
concentrated essence of it in the present age, let us ask who, in the
last generation of painters, was equal to the old masters? Was it
Highmore, or Hayman, or Hudson, or Kneller? Who was the English Raphael,
or Rubens, or Vandyke, of that day, to whom the Catalogue-critic would
have extended his patriotic sympathy and damning patronage? Kneller, we
have been told, was thought superior to Vandyke by the persons of
fashion whom he painted. So St. Thomas Apostle seems higher than St.
Paul’s while you are close under it; but the farther off you go the
higher the mighty dome aspires into the skies. What is become of all
those great men who flourished in our own time—‘like flowers in men’s
caps, dying or ere they sicken’—Hoppner, Opie, Shee, Loutherbourg,
Rigaud, Romney, Barry, the painters of the Shakspeare Gallery? ‘Gone to
the vault of all the Capulets,’ and their pictures with them, or before
them! Shall we put more faith in their successors? Shall we take the
words of their friends for their taste and genius? No, we will stick to
what we know will stick to us, the ‘heirlooms’ of the Art, the Black
Masters. The picture, for instance, of Charles I. on horseback, which
our critic criticises with such heavy drollery, is worth all the
pictures that were ever exhibited at the Royal Academy (from the time of
Sir Joshua to the present time inclusive) put together. It shews more
knowledge and feeling of the Art, more skill and beauty, more sense of
what it is in objects that gives pleasure to the eye, with more power to
communicate this pleasure to the world. If either this single picture,
or all the lumber that has ever appeared at the Academy, were to be
destroyed, there could not be a question which, with any Artist or with
any judge or lover of Art. So stands the account between ancient and
modern Art! By this we may judge of all the rest. The Catalogue-writer
makes some strictures in the second part on the Waterloo Exhibition,
which he does not think what it ought to be. We wonder he had another
word to say on modern Art after seeing it. He should instantly have
taken the resolution of _Iago_, ‘From this time forth I never will speak
more.’

The writer of the _Catalogue Raisonné_ has fallen foul of two things
which ought to be sacred to Artists and lovers of Art—Genius and Fame.
If they are not sacred to them, we do not know to whom they will be
sacred. A work such as the present shews that the person who could write
it must either have no knowledge or taste for Art, or must be actuated
by a feeling of unaccountable malignity towards it. It shews that any
body of men by whom it could be set on foot or encouraged are not an
Academy of Art. It shews that a country in which such a publication
could make its appearance is not the country of the Fine Arts. Does the
writer think to prove the genius of his countrymen for Art by
proclaiming their utter insensibility and flagitious contempt for all
beauty and excellence in the art, except in their own works? No! it is
very true that the English are a shopkeeping nation; and the _Catalogue
Raisonné_ is the proof of it.

Finally, the works of the moderns are not, like those of the Old
Masters, a second nature. Oh Art, true likeness of nature, ‘balm of hurt
minds, great nature’s second course, chief nourisher in life’s feast,’
of what would our Catalogue-mongers deprive us in depriving us of thee
and of thy glories, of the lasting works of the great Painters, and of
their names no less magnificent, grateful to our hearts as the sound of
celestial harmony from other spheres, waking around us (whether heard or
not) from youth to age, the stay, the guide and anchor of our purest
thoughts; whom, having once seen, we always remember, and who teach us
to see all things through them; without whom life would be to begin
again, and the earth barren; of Raphael, who lifted the human form half
way to heaven; of Titian, who painted the mind in the face, and unfolded
the soul of things to the eye; of Rubens, around whose pencil gorgeous
shapes thronged numberless, startling us by the novel accidents of form
and colour, putting the spirit of motion into the universe, and weaving
a gay fantastic round and Bacchanalian dance with nature; of thee, too,
Rembrandt, who didst redeem one half of nature from obloquy, from the
nickname in the Catalogue, ‘smoothing the raven down of darkness till it
smiled,’ and tinging it with a light like streaks of burnished ore; of
these, and more, of whom the world is scarce worthy; and what would they
give us in return? Nothing.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 37.]                ON POETICAL VERSATILITY         [DEC. 22, 1816.

The spirit of poetry is in itself favourable to humanity and liberty:
but, we suspect, not when its aid is most wanted. The spirit of poetry
is not the spirit of mortification or of martyrdom. Poetry dwells in a
perpetual Utopia of its own, and is for that reason very ill calculated
to make a Paradise upon earth, by encountering the shocks and
disappointments of the world. Poetry, like law, is a fiction, only a
more agreeable one. It does not create difficulties where they do not
exist; but contrives to get rid of them, whether they exist or not. It
is not entangled in cobwebs of its own making, but soars above all
obstacles. It cannot be ‘constrained by mastery.’ It has the range of
the universe; it traverses the empyrean, and looks down on nature from a
higher sphere. When it lights upon the earth, it loses some of its
dignity and its use. Its strength is in its wings; its element the air.
Standing on its feet, jostling with the crowd, it is liable to be
overthrown, trampled on, and defaced; for its wings are of a dazzling
brightness, ‘heaven’s own tinct,’ and the least soil upon them shews to
disadvantage. Sullied, degraded as we have seen it, we shall not insult
over it, but leave it to Time to take out the stains, seeing it is a
thing immortal as itself. ‘Being so majestical, we should do it wrong to
offer it the show of violence.’ But the best things, in their abuse,
often become the worst; and so it is with poetry when it is diverted
from its proper end. Poets live in an ideal world, where they make
everything out according to their wishes and fancies. They either find
things delightful or make them so. They feign the beautiful and grand
out of their own minds, and imagine all things to be, not what they are,
but what they ought to be. They are naturally inventors, creators of
truth, of love, and beauty: and while they speak to us from the sacred
shrine of their own hearts, while they pour out the pure treasures of
thought to the world, they cannot be too much admired and applauded: but
when, forgetting their high calling, and becoming tools and puppets in
the hands of power, they would pass off the gewgaws of corruption and
love-tokens of self-interest as the gifts of the Muse, they cannot be
too much despised and shunned. We do not like novels founded on facts,
nor do we like poets turned courtiers. Poets, it has been said, succeed
best in fiction: and they should for the most part stick to it.
Invention, not upon an imaginary subject, is a lie: the varnishing over
the vices or deformities of actual objects is hypocrisy. Players leave
their finery at the stage-door, or they would be hooted; poets come out
into the world with all their bravery on, and yet they would pass for
_bona fide_ persons. They lend the colours of fancy to whatever they
see: whatever they touch becomes gold, though it were lead. With them
every Joan is a lady; and kings and queens are human. Matters of fact
they embellish at their will, and reason is the plaything of their
passions, their caprice, or their interest. There is no practice so base
of which they will not become the panders: no sophistry of which their
understanding may not be made the voluntary dupe. Their only object is
to please their fancy. Their souls are effeminate, half man and half
woman:—they want fortitude, and are without principle. If things do not
turn out according to their wishes, they will make their wishes turn
round to things. They can easily overlook whatever they do not like, and
make an idol of any thing they please. The object of poetry is to
please: this art naturally gives pleasure, and excites admiration.
Poets, therefore, cannot do well without sympathy and flattery. It is
accordingly very much against the grain that they remain long on the
unpopular side of the question. They do not like to be shut out when
laurels are to be given away at Court—or places under Government to be
disposed of, in romantic situations in the country. They are happy to be
reconciled on the first opportunity to prince and people, and to
exchange their principles for a pension. They have not always strength
of mind to think for themselves, nor courage enough to bear the unjust
stigma of the opinions they have taken upon trust from others. Truth
alone does not satisfy their pampered appetites without the sauce of
praise. To prefer truth to all other things, it requires that the mind
should have been at some pains in finding it out, and that we should
feel a severe delight in the contemplation of truth, seen by its own
clear light, and not as it is reflected in the admiring eyes of the
world. A philosopher may perhaps make a shift to be contented with the
sober draughts of reason: a poet must have the applause of the world to
intoxicate him. Milton was, however, a poet, and an honest man; he was
Cromwell’s secretary.

                                                                   T. T.


 NO. 38.]                 ON ACTORS AND ACTING            [JAN. 5, 1817.

Players are ‘the abstracts and brief chronicles of the time’; the motley
representatives of human nature. They are the only honest hypocrites.
Their life is a voluntary dream; a studied madness. The height of their
ambition is to be _beside themselves_. To-day kings, to-morrow beggars,
it is only when they are themselves, that they are nothing. Made up of
mimic laughter and tears, passing from the extremes of joy or woe at the
prompter’s call, they wear the livery of other men’s fortunes; their
very thoughts are not their own. They are, as it were, train-bearers in
the pageant of life, and hold a glass up to humanity, frailer than
itself. We see ourselves at second-hand in them: they shew us all that
we are, all that we wish to be, and all that we dread to be. The stage
is an epitome, a bettered likeness of the world, with the dull part left
out: and, indeed, with this omission, it is nearly big enough to hold
all the rest. What brings the resemblance nearer is, that, as _they_
imitate us, we, in our turn, imitate them. How many fine gentlemen do we
owe to the stage? How many romantic lovers are mere Romeos in
masquerade? How many soft bosoms have heaved with Juliet’s sighs? They
teach us when to laugh and when to weep, when to love and when to hate,
upon principle and with a good grace! Wherever there is a play-house,
the world will go on not amiss. The stage not only refines the manners,
but it is the best teacher of morals, for it is the truest and most
intelligible picture of life. It stamps the image of virtue on the mind
by first softening the rude materials of which it is composed, by a
sense of pleasure. It regulates the passions by giving a loose to the
imagination. It points out the selfish and depraved to our detestation,
the amiable and generous to our admiration; and if it clothes the more
seductive vices with the borrowed graces of wit and fancy, even those
graces operate as a diversion to the coarser poison of experience and
bad example, and often prevent or carry off the infection by inoculating
the mind with a certain taste and elegance. To shew how little we agree
with the common declamations against the immoral tendency of the stage
on this score, we will hazard a conjecture, that the acting of the
Beggar’s Opera a certain number of nights every year since it was first
brought out, has done more towards putting down the practice of highway
robbery, than all the gibbets that ever were erected. A person, after
seeing this piece is too deeply imbued with a sense of humanity, is in
too good humour with himself and the rest of the world, to set about
cutting throats or rifling pockets. Whatever makes a jest of vice,
leaves it too much a matter of indifference for any one in his senses to
rush desperately on his ruin for its sake. We suspect that just the
contrary effect must be produced by the representation of George
Barnwell, which is too much in the style of the Ordinary’s sermon to
meet with any better success. The mind, in such cases, instead of being
deterred by the alarming consequences held out to it, revolts against
the denunciation of them as an insult offered to its free-will, and, in
a spirit of defiance, returns a practical answer to them, by daring the
worst that can happen. The most striking lesson ever read to levity and
licentiousness, is in the last act of the Inconstant, where young
Mirabel is preserved by the fidelity of his mistress, Orinda, in the
disguise of a page, from the hands of assassins, into whose power he has
been allured by the temptations of vice and beauty. There never was a
rake who did not become in imagination a reformed man, during the
representation of the last trying scenes of this admirable comedy.

If the stage is useful as a school of instruction, it is no less so as a
source of amusement. It is the source of the greatest enjoyment at the
time, and a never-failing fund of agreeable reflection afterwards. The
merits of a new play, or of a new actor, are always among the first
topics of polite conversation. One way in which public exhibitions
contribute to refine and humanise mankind, is by supplying them with
ideas and subjects of conversation and interest in common. The progress
of civilisation is in proportion to the number of common-places current
in society. For instance, if we meet with a stranger at an inn or in a
stage-coach, who knows nothing but his own affairs, his shop, his
customers, his farm, his pigs, his poultry, we can carry on no
conversation with him on these local and personal matters: the only way
is to let him have all the talk to himself. But if he has fortunately
ever seen Mr. Liston act, this is an immediate topic of mutual
conversation, and we agree together the rest of the evening in
discussing the merits of that inimitable actor, with the same
satisfaction as in talking over the affairs of the most intimate friend.

If the stage thus introduces us familiarly to our contemporaries, it
also brings us acquainted with former times. It is an interesting
revival of past ages, manners, opinions, dresses, persons, and
actions,—whether it carries us back to the wars of York and Lancaster,
or half way back to the heroic times of Greece and Rome, in some
translation from the French, or quite back to the age of Charles II. in
the scenes of Congreve and of Etherege, (the gay Sir George!)—happy age,
when kings and nobles led purely ornamental lives; when the utmost
stretch of a morning’s study went no further than the choice of a
sword-knot, or the adjustment of a side-curl; when the soul spoke out in
all the pleasing eloquence of dress; and beaux and belles, enamoured of
themselves in one another’s follies, fluttered like gilded butterflies
in giddy mazes through the walks of St. James’s Park!

A good company of comedians, a Theatre-Royal judiciously managed, is
your true Herald’s College; the only Antiquarian Society, that is worth
a rush. It is for this reason that there is such an air of romance about
players, and that it is pleasanter to see them, even in their own
persons, than any of the three learned professions. We feel more respect
for John Kemble in a plain coat, than for the Lord Chancellor on the
woolsack. He is surrounded, to our eyes, with a greater number of
imposing recollections: he is a more reverend piece of formality; a more
complicated tissue of costume. We do not know whether to look upon this
accomplished actor as Pierre or King John or Coriolanus or Cato or
Leontes or the Stranger. But we see in him a stately hieroglyphic of
humanity; a living monument of departed greatness, a sombre comment on
the rise and fall of kings. We look after him till he is out of sight,
as we listen to a story of one of Ossian’s heroes, to ‘a tale of other
times!’

One of the most affecting things we know is to see a favourite actor
take leave of the stage. We were present not long ago when Mr. Bannister
quitted it. We do not wonder that his feelings were overpowered on the
occasion: ours were nearly so too. We remembered him, in the first
heyday of our youthful spirits, in the _Prize_, in which he played so
delightfully with that fine old croaker Suett, and Madame Storace,—in
the farce of _My Grandmother_, in the _Son-in-Law_, in _Autolycus_, and
in _Scrub_, in which our satisfaction was at its height. At that time,
King and Parsons, and Dodd, and Quick, and Edwin were in the full vigour
of their reputation, who are now all gone. We still feel the vivid
delight with which we used to see their names in the play-bills, as we
went along to the Theatre. Bannister was one of the last of these that
remained; and we parted with him as we should with one of our oldest and
best friends. The most pleasant feature in the profession of a player,
and which, indeed, is peculiar to it, is that we not only admire the
talents of those who adorn it, but we contract a personal intimacy with
them. There is no class of society whom so many persons regard with
affection as actors. We greet them on the stage; we like to meet them in
the streets; they almost always recall to us pleasant associations; and
we feel our gratitude excited, without the uneasiness of a sense of
obligation. The very gaiety and popularity, however, which surround the
life of a favourite performer, make the retiring from it a very serious
business. It glances a mortifying reflection on the shortness of human
life, and the vanity of human pleasures. Something reminds us, that ‘all
the world’s a stage, and all the men and women merely players.’


 NO. 39.]                      ON THE SAME                [JAN. 5, 1817.

It has been considered as the misfortune of first-rate talents for the
stage, that they leave no record behind them except that of vague
rumour, and that the genius of a great actor perishes with him, ‘leaving
the world no copy.’ This is a misfortune, or at least an unpleasant
circumstance, to actors; but it is, perhaps, an advantage to the stage.
It leaves an opening to originality. The stage is always beginning anew;
the candidates for theatrical reputation are always setting out afresh,
unencumbered by the affectation of the faults or excellences of their
predecessors. In this respect, we should imagine that the average
quantity of dramatic talent remains more nearly the same than that in
any other walk of art. In no other instance do the complaints of the
degeneracy of the moderns seem so unfounded as in this; and Colley
Cibber’s account of the regular decline of the stage, from the time of
Shakspeare to that of Charles II., and from the time of Charles II. to
the beginning of George II. appears quite ridiculous. The stage is a
place where genius is sure to come upon its legs, in a generation or two
at farthest. In the other arts, (as painting and poetry), it has been
contended that what has been well done already, by giving rise to
endless vapid imitations, is an obstacle to what might be done well
hereafter: that the models or _chef-d’œuvres_ of art, where they are
accumulated, choke up the path to excellence; and that the works of
genius, where they can be rendered permanent and handed down from age to
age, not only prevent, but render superfluous, future productions of the
same kind. We have not, neither do we want, two Shakspeares, two
Miltons, two Raphaels, any more than we require two suns in the same
sphere. Even Miss O’Neill stands a little in the way of our
recollections of Mrs. Siddons. But Mr. Kean is an excellent substitute
for the memory of Garrick, whom we never saw. When an author dies, it is
no matter, for his works remain. When a great actor dies, there is a
void produced in society, a gap which requires to be filled up. Who does
not go to see Kean? Who, if Garrick were alive, would go to see him? At
least one or the other must have quitted the stage. We have seen what a
ferment has been excited among our living artists by the exhibition of
the works of the old Masters at the British Gallery. What would the
actors say to it, if, by any spell or power of necromancy, all the
celebrated actors, for the last hundred years could be made to appear
again on the boards of Covent Garden and Drury-Lane, for the last time,
in all their most brilliant parts? What a rich treat to the town, what a
feast for the critics, to go and see Betterton, and Booth, and Wilks,
and Sandford, and Nokes, and Leigh, and Penkethman, and Bullock, and
Estcourt, and Dogget, and Mrs. Barry, and Mrs. Montfort, and Mrs.
Oldfield, and Mrs. Bracegirdle, and Mrs. Cibber, and Cibber himself, the
prince of coxcombs, and Macklin, and Quin, and Rich, and Mrs. Clive, and
Mrs. Pritchard, and Mrs. Abington, and Weston, and Shuter, and Garrick,
and all the rest of those who ‘gladdened life, and whose deaths eclipsed
the gaiety of nations’! We should certainly be there. We should buy a
ticket for the season. We should enjoy _our hundred days_ again. We
should not lose a single night. We would not, for a great deal, be
absent from Betterton’s Hamlet or his Brutus, or from Booth’s Cato, as
it was first acted to the contending applause of Whigs and Tories. We
should be in the first row when Mrs. Barry (who was kept by Lord
Rochester, and with whom Otway was in love) played Monimia or Belvidera;
and we suppose we should go to see Mrs. Bracegirdle (with whom all the
world was in love) in all her parts. We should then know exactly whether
Penkethman’s manner of picking a chicken, and Bullock’s mode of
devouring asparagus, answered to the ingenious account of them in the
Tatler; and whether Dogget was equal to Dowton—whether Mrs. Montfort[63]
or Mrs. Abington was the finest lady—whether Wilks or Cibber was the
best Sir Harry Wildair—whether Macklin was really ‘the Jew that
Shakspeare drew,’ and whether Garrick was, upon the whole, so great an
actor as the world have made him out! Many people have a strong desire
to pry into the secrets of futurity: for our own parts, we should be
satisfied if we had the power to recall the dead, and live the past over
again as often as we pleased! Players, after all, have little reason to
complain of their hard-earned, short-lived popularity. One thunder of
applause from pit, boxes, and gallery, is equal to a whole immortality
of posthumous fame: and when we hear an actor, whose modesty is equal to
his merit, declare, that he would like to see a dog wag his tail in
approbation, what must he feel when he sees the whole house in a roar!
Besides, Fame, as if their reputation had been entrusted to her alone,
has been particularly careful of the renown of her theatrical
favourites: she forgets one by one, and year by year, those who have
been great lawyers, great statesmen, and great warriors in their day;
but the name of Garrick still survives with the works of Reynolds and of
Johnson.

Actors have been accused, as a profession, of being extravagant and
dissipated. While they are said to be so as a piece of common cant, they
are likely to continue so. But there is a sentence in Shakspeare which
should be stuck as a label in the mouths of our beadles and whippers-in
of morality: ‘The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and ill
together: our virtues would be proud if our faults whipped them not: and
our vices would despair if they were not cherished by our virtues.’ With
respect to the extravagance of actors, as a traditional character, it is
not to be wondered at. They live from hand to mouth: they plunge from
want into luxury; they have no means of making money _breed_, and all
professions that do not live by turning money into money, or have not a
certainty of accumulating it in the end by parsimony, spend it.
Uncertain of the future, they make sure of the present moment. This is
not unwise. Chilled with poverty, steeped in contempt, they sometimes
pass into the sunshine of fortune, and are lifted to the very pinnacle
of public favour; yet even there cannot calculate on the continuance of
success, but are, ‘like the giddy sailor on the mast, ready with every
blast to topple down into the fatal bowels of the deep!’ Besides, if the
young enthusiast, who is smitten with the stage, and with the public as
a mistress, were naturally a close _hunks_, he would become or remain a
city clerk, instead of turning player. Again, with respect to the habit
of convivial indulgence, an actor, to be a good one, must have a great
spirit of enjoyment in himself, strong impulses, strong passions, and a
strong sense of pleasure: for it is his business to imitate the
passions, and to communicate pleasure to others. A man of genius is not
a machine. The neglected actor may be excused if he drinks oblivion of
his disappointments; the successful one, if he quaffs the applause of
the world, and enjoys the friendship of those who are the friends of the
favourites of fortune, in draughts of nectar. There is no path so steep
as that of fame: no labour so hard as the pursuit of excellence. The
intellectual excitement, inseparable from those professions which call
forth all our sensibility to pleasure and pain, requires some
corresponding physical excitement to support our failure, and not a
little to allay the ferment of the spirits attendant on success. If
there is any tendency to dissipation beyond this in the profession of a
player, it is owing to the prejudices entertained against them, to that
spirit of bigotry which in a neighbouring country would deny actors
Christian burial after their death, and to that cant of criticism,
which, in our own, slurs over their characters, while living, with a
half-witted jest.

A London engagement is generally considered by actors as the _ne plus
ultra_ of their ambition, as ‘a consummation devoutly to be wished,’ as
the great prize in the lottery of their professional life. But this
appears to us, who are not in the secret, to be rather the prose
termination of their adventurous career: it is the provincial
commencement that is the poetical and truly enviable part of it. After
that, they have comparatively little to hope or fear. ‘The wine of life
is drunk, and but the lees remain.’ In London, they become gentlemen,
and the King’s servants: but it is the romantic mixture of the hero and
the vagabond that constitutes the essence of the player’s life. It is
the transition from their real to their assumed characters, from the
contempt of the world to the applause of the multitude, that gives its
zest to the latter, and raises them as much above common humanity at
night, as in the daytime they are depressed below it. ‘Hurried from
fierce extremes, by contrast made more fierce,’—it is rags and a
flock-bed which give their splendour to a plume of feathers and a
throne. We should suppose, that if the most admired actor on the London
stage were brought to confession on this point, he would acknowledge
that all the applause he had received from ‘brilliant and overflowing
audiences,’ was nothing to the light-headed intoxication of unlooked-for
success in a barn. In town, actors are criticised: in country-places,
they are wondered at, or hooted at: it is of little consequence which,
so that the interval is not too long between. For ourselves, we own that
the description of the strolling player in Gil Blas, soaking his dry
crusts in the well by the roadside, presents to us a perfect picture of
human felicity.

                                                                   W. H.


 NO. 40.]          WHY THE ARTS ARE NOT PROGRESSIVE?—A     [JAN. 11, 15;
                                FRAGMENT                  SEP. 11, 1814.

It is often made a subject of complaint and surprise, that the arts in
this country, and in modern times, have not kept pace with the general
progress of society and civilisation in other respects, and it has been
proposed to remedy the deficiency by more carefully availing ourselves
of the advantages which time and circumstances have placed within our
reach, but which we have hitherto neglected, the study of the antique,
the formation of academies, and the distribution of prizes.

First, the complaint itself, that the arts do not attain that
progressive degree of perfection which might reasonably be expected from
them, proceeds on a false notion, for the analogy appealed to in support
of the regular advances of art to higher degrees of excellence, totally
fails; it applies to science, not to art. Secondly, the expedients
proposed to remedy the evil by adventitious means are only calculated to
confirm it. The arts hold immediate communication with nature, and are
only derived from that source. When that original impulse no longer
exists, when the inspiration of genius is fled, all the attempts to
recal it are no better than the tricks of galvanism to restore the dead
to life. The arts may be said to resemble Antæus in his struggle with
Hercules, who was strangled when he was raised above the ground, and
only revived and recovered his strength when he touched his mother
earth.

Nothing is more contrary to the fact than the supposition that in what
we understand by the _fine arts_, as painting and poetry, relative
perfection is only the result of repeated efforts, and that what has
been once well done constantly leads to something better. What is
mechanical, reducible to rule, or capable of demonstration, is
progressive, and admits of gradual improvement: what is not mechanical
or definite, but depends on genius, taste, and feeling, very soon
becomes stationary or retrograde, and loses more than it gains by
transfusion. The contrary opinion is, indeed, a common error, which has
grown up, like many others, from transferring an analogy of one kind to
something quite distinct, without thinking of the difference in the
nature of the things, or attending to the difference of the results. For
most persons, finding what wonderful advances have been made in biblical
criticism, in chemistry, in mechanics, in geometry, astronomy,
etc.—_i.e._, in things depending on mere inquiry and experiment, or on
absolute demonstration, have been led hastily to conclude, that there
was a general tendency in the efforts of the human intellect to improve
by repetition, and in all other arts and institutions to grow perfect
and mature by time. We look back upon the theological creed of our
ancestors, and their discoveries in natural philosophy, with a smile of
pity; science, and the arts connected with it, have all had their
infancy, their youth, and manhood, and seem to have in them no principle
of limitation or decay; and, inquiring no farther about the matter, we
infer, in the height of our self-congratulation, and in the intoxication
of our pride, that the same progress has been, and will continue to be,
made in all other things which are the work of man. The fact, however,
stares us so plainly in the face, that one would think the smallest
reflection must suggest the truth, and overturn our sanguine theories.
The greatest poets, the ablest orators, the best painters, and the
finest sculptors that the world ever saw, appeared soon after the birth
of these arts, and lived in a state of society which was, in other
respects, comparatively barbarous. Those arts, which depend on
individual genius and incommunicable power, have always leaped at once
from infancy to manhood, from the first rude dawn of invention to their
meridian height and dazzling lustre, and have in general declined ever
after. This is the peculiar distinction and privilege of each, of
science and of art; of the one, never to attain its utmost summit of
perfection, and of the other, to arrive at it almost at once. Homer,
Chaucer, Spenser, Shakspeare, Dante, and Ariosto (Milton alone was of a
later age, and not the worse for it), Raphael, Titian, Michael Angelo,
Correggio, Cervantes, and Boccaccio—all lived near the beginning of
their arts—perfected, and all but created them. These giant sons of
genius stand, indeed, upon the earth, but they tower above their
fellows, and the long line of their successors does not interpose any
thing to obstruct their view, or lessen their brightness. In strength
and stature they are unrivalled, in grace and beauty they have never
been surpassed. In after-ages, and more refined periods, (as they are
called), great men have arisen one by one, as it were by throes and at
intervals: though in general the best of these cultivated and artificial
minds were of an inferior order, as Tasso and Pope among poets, Guido
and Vandyke among painters. But in the earliest stages of the arts, when
the first mechanical difficulties had been got over, and the language as
it were acquired, they rose by clusters and in constellations, never to
rise again.

The arts of painting and poetry are conversant with the world of thought
within us, and with the world of sense without us—with what we know, and
see, and feel intimately. They flow from the sacred shrine of our own
breasts, and are kindled at the living lamp of nature. The pulse of the
passions assuredly beat as high, the depths and soundings of the human
heart were as well understood three thousand years ago, as they are at
present; the face of nature and ‘the human face divine,’ shone as bright
then as they have ever done. It is this light, reflected by true genius
on art, that marks out its path before it, and sheds a glory round the
Muses’ feet, like that which ‘circled Una’s angel face,

               ‘And made a sunshine in the shady place.’

Nature is the soul of art. There is a strength in the imagination that
reposes entirely on nature, which nothing else can supply. There is in
the old poets and painters a vigour and grasp of mind, a full possession
of their subject, a confidence and firm faith, a sublime simplicity, an
elevation of thought, proportioned to their depth of feeling, an
increasing force and impetus, which moves, penetrates, and kindles all
that comes in contact with it, which seems, not theirs, but given to
them. It is this reliance on the power of nature which has produced
those master-pieces by the Prince of Painters, in which expression is
all in all, where one spirit, that of truth, pervades every part, brings
down heaven to earth, mingles cardinals and popes with angels and
apostles, and yet blends and harmonises the whole by the true touches
and intense feeling of what is beautiful and grand in nature. It was the
same trust in nature that enabled Chaucer to describe the patient sorrow
of Griselda; or the delight of that young beauty in the Flower and the
Leaf, shrouded in her bower, and listening, in the morning of the year,
to the singing of the nightingale, while her joy rises with the rising
song, and gushes out afresh at every pause, and is borne along with the
full tide of pleasure, and still increases and repeats and prolongs
itself, and knows no ebb. It is thus that Boccaccio, in the divine story
of the Hawk, has represented Frederigo Alberigi steadily contemplating
his favourite Falcon (the wreck and remnant of his fortune), and glad to
see how fat and fair a bird she is, thinking what a dainty repast she
would make for his Mistress, who had deigned to visit him in his low
cell. So Isabella mourns over her pot of Basile, and never asks for any
thing but that. So Lear calls out for his poor fool, and invokes the
heavens, for they are old like him. So Titian impressed on the
countenance of that young Neapolitan nobleman in the Louvre, a look that
never passed away. So Nicolas Poussin describes some shepherds wandering
out in a morning of the spring, and coming to a tomb with this
inscription, ‘I ALSO WAS AN ARCADIAN.’

In general, it must happen in the first stages of the Arts, that as none
but those who had a natural genius for them would attempt to practise
them, so none but those who had a natural taste for them would pretend
to judge of or criticise them. This must be an incalculable advantage to
the man of true genius, for it is no other than the privilege of being
tried by his peers. In an age when connoisseurship had not become a
fashion; when religion, war, and intrigue, occupied the time and
thoughts of the great, only those minds of superior refinement would be
led to notice the works of art, who had a real sense of their
excellence; and in giving way to the powerful bent of his own genius,
the painter was most likely to consult the taste of his judges. He had
not to deal with pretenders to taste, through vanity, affectation, and
idleness. He had to appeal to the higher faculties of the soul; to that
deep and innate sensibility to truth and beauty, which required only a
proper object to have its enthusiasm excited; and to that independent
strength of mind, which, in the midst of ignorance and barbarism, hailed
and fostered genius, wherever it met with it. Titian was patronised by
Charles V., Count Castiglione was the friend of Raphael. These were true
patrons, and true critics; and as there were no others, (for the world,
in general, merely looked on and wondered), there can be little doubt,
that such a period of dearth of factitious patronage would be the most
favourable to the full developement of the greatest talents, and the
attainment of the highest excellence.

The diffusion of taste is not the same thing as the improvement of
taste; but it is only the former of these objects that is promoted by
public institutions and other artificial means. The number of candidates
for fame, and of pretenders to criticism, is thus increased beyond all
proportion, while the quantity of genius and feeling remains the same;
with this difference, that the man of genius is lost in the crowd of
competitors, who would never have become such but from encouragement and
example; and that the opinion of those few persons whom nature intended
for judges, is drowned in the noisy suffrages of shallow smatterers in
taste. The principle of universal suffrage, however applicable to
matters of government, which concern the common feelings and common
interests of society, is by no means applicable to matters of taste,
which can only be decided upon by the most refined understandings. The
highest efforts of genius, in every walk of art, can never be properly
understood by the generality of mankind: There are numberless beauties
and truths which lie far beyond their comprehension. It is only as
refinement and sublimity are blended with other qualities of a more
obvious and grosser nature, that they pass current with the world. Taste
is the highest degree of sensibility, or the impression made on the most
cultivated and sensible of minds, as genius is the result of the highest
powers both of feeling and invention. It may be objected, that the
public taste is capable of gradual improvement, because, in the end, the
public do justice to works of the greatest merit. This is a mistake. The
reputation ultimately, and often slowly affixed to works of genius is
stamped upon them by authority, not by popular consent or the common
sense of the world. We imagine that the admiration of the works of
celebrated men has become common, because the admiration of their names
has become so. But does not every ignorant connoisseur pretend the same
veneration, and talk with the same vapid assurance of Michael Angelo,
though he has never seen even a copy of any of his pictures, as if he
had studied them accurately,—merely because Sir Joshua Reynolds has
praised him? Is Milton more popular now than when the Paradise Lost was
first published? Or does he not rather owe his reputation to the
judgment of a few persons in every successive period, accumulating in
his favour, and overpowering by its weight the public indifference? Why
is Shakspeare popular? Not from his refinement of character or
sentiment, so much as from his power of telling a story, the variety and
invention, the tragic catastrophe and broad farce of his plays. Spenser
is not yet understood. Does not Boccaccio pass to this day for a writer
of ribaldry, because his jests and lascivious tales were all that caught
the vulgar ear, while the story of the Falcon is forgotten!

                                                                   W. H.


                        End of THE ROUND TABLE.

-----

Footnote 30:

  It is Steele’s; and the whole paper (No. 95) is in his most delightful
  manner. The dream about the mistress, however, is given to Addison by
  the Editors, and the general style of that number is his; though, from
  the story being related personally of Bickerstaff, who is also
  represented as having been at that time in the army, we conclude it to
  have originally come from Steele, perhaps in the course of
  conversation. The particular incident is much more like a story of his
  than of Addison’s.—H. T.

Footnote 31:

  We had in our hands the other day an original copy of the _Tatler_,
  and a list of the subscribers. It is curious to see some names there
  which we should hardly think of, (that of Sir Isaac Newton is among
  them), and also to observe the degree of interest excited by those of
  the different persons, which is not adjusted according to the rules of
  the Heralds’ College.

Footnote 32:

  Pope also declares that he had a particular regard for an old post
  which stood in the court-yard before the house where he was brought
  up.

Footnote 33:

  See also the passage in his prose works relating to the first design
  of _Paradise Lost_.

Footnote 34:

              ‘Oh! for my sake do you with fortune chide,
              The guilty goddess of my harmless deeds,
              That did not better for my life provide,
              Than public means which public manners breeds.
              Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
              And almost thence my nature is subdued
              To what it works in, like the dyer’s hand.’

  At another time, we find him ‘desiring this man’s art, and that man’s
  scope’: so little was Shakspeare, as far as we can learn, enamoured of
  himself!

Footnote 35:

  See an Essay on the genius of Hogarth, by C. Lamb, published in a
  periodical work, called the _Reflector_.

Footnote 36:

  ‘A good sherris-sack hath a twofold operation in it; it ascends me
  into the brain, dries me there all the foolish, dull, and crudy
  vapours which environ it; and makes it apprehensive, quick, forgetive,
  full of nimble, fiery, and delectable shapes, which, delivered over to
  the tongue, becomes excellent wit,’ etc.—_Second Part of Henry IV._

Footnote 37:

  We have an instance in our own times of a man, equally devoid of
  understanding and principle, but who manages the House of Commons by
  his _manner_ alone.

Footnote 38:

  Mr. Wordsworth, who has written a sonnet to the King on the good that
  he has done in the last fifty years, has made an attack on a set of
  gipsies for having done nothing in four and twenty hours. ‘The stars
  had gone their rounds, but they had not stirred from their place.’ And
  why should they, if they were comfortable where they were? We did not
  expect this turn from Mr. Wordsworth, whom we had considered as the
  prince of poetical idlers, and patron of the philosophy of indolence,
  who formerly insisted on our spending our time ‘in a wise
  passiveness.’ Mr. W. will excuse us if we are not converts to his
  recantation of his original doctrine; for he who changes his opinion
  loses his authority. We did not look for this Sunday-school philosophy
  from him. What had he himself been doing in these four and twenty
  hours? Had he been admiring a flower, or writing a sonnet? We hate the
  doctrine of utility, even in a philosopher, and much more in a poet:
  for the only real utility is that which leads to enjoyment, and the
  end is, in all cases, better than the means. A friend of ours from the
  North of England proposed to make Stonehenge of some use, by building
  houses with it. Mr. W.’s quarrel with the gipsies is an improvement on
  this extravagance, for the gipsies are the only living monuments of
  the first ages of society. They are an everlasting source of thought
  and reflection on the advantages and disadvantages of the progress of
  civilisation: they are a better answer to the cotton manufactories
  than Mr. W. has given in the _Excursion_. ‘They are a grotesque
  ornament to the civil order.’ We should be sorry to part with Mr.
  Wordsworth’s poetry, because it amuses and interests us: we should be
  still sorrier to part with the tents of our old friends, the Bohemian
  philosophers, because they amuse and interest us more. If any one goes
  a journey, the principal event in it is his meeting with a party of
  gipsies. The pleasantest trait in the character of Sir Roger de
  Coverley, is his interview with the gipsy fortune-teller. This is
  enough.

Footnote 39:

  The Dissenters in this country (if we except the founders of sects,
  who fall under a class by themselves) have produced only two
  remarkable men, Priestley and Jonathan Edwards. The work of the latter
  on the Will is written with as much power of logic, and more in the
  true spirit of philosophy, than any other metaphysical work in the
  language. His object throughout is not to perplex the question, but to
  satisfy his own mind and the reader’s. In general, the principle of
  dissent arises more from want of sympathy and imagination, than from
  strength of reason. The spirit of contradiction is not the spirit of
  philosophy.

Footnote 40:

  The modern Quakers come as near the mark in these cases as they can.
  They do not go to plays, but they are great attenders of
  spouting-clubs and lectures. They do not frequent concerts, but run
  after pictures. We do not know exactly how they stand with respect to
  the circulating libraries. A Quaker poet would be a literary
  phenomenon.

Footnote 41:

  We have made the above observations, not as theological partisans, but
  as natural historians. We shall some time or other give the reverse of
  the picture; for there are vices inherent in establishments and their
  thorough-paced adherents, which well deserve to be distinctly pointed
  out.

Footnote 42:

  Is all this a rhodomontade, or literal matter of fact, not credible in
  these degenerate days?

Footnote 43:

  One of the most interesting traits of the amiable simplicity of
  Walton, is the circumstance of his friendship for Cotton, one of the
  ‘swash-bucklers’ of the age. Dr. Johnson said there were only three
  works which the reader was sorry to come to the end of, _Don Quixote_,
  _Robinson Crusoe_, and the _Pilgrim’s Progress_. Perhaps Walton’s
  _Angler_ might be added to the number.

Footnote 44:

  Oxberry’s manner of acting this character is a very edifying comment
  on the text: he flings his arms about, like those of a figure pulled
  by strings, and seems actuated by a pure spirit of infatuation, as if
  one blast of folly had taken possession of his whole frame,

              ‘And filled up all the mighty void of sense.’

Footnote 45:

  The following lines are remarkable for a certain cloying sweetness in
  the repetition of the rhymes:

           _Titania._ Be kind and courteous to this gentleman;
           Hop in his walks, and gambol in his eyes;
           Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
           With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
           The honey-bags steal from the humble bees,
           And for night tapers crop their waxen thighs,
           And light them at the fiery glow-worm’s eyes,
           To have my love to bed, and to arise:
           And pluck the wings from painted butterflies,
           To fan the moon beams from his sleeping eyes;’
           Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.’

Footnote 46:

  The late ingenious Baron Grimm, of acute critical memory, was up to
  the merit of the _Beggar’s Opera_. In his Correspondence, he says, ‘If
  it be true that the nearer a writer is to Nature, the more certain he
  is of pleasing, it must be allowed that the English, in their dramatic
  pieces, have greatly the advantage over us. There reigns in them an
  inestimable tone of nature, which the timidity of our taste has
  banished from French pieces. M. Patu has just published, in two
  volumes, _A selection of smaller dramatic pieces, translated from the
  English_, which will eminently support what I have advanced. The
  principal one among this selection is the celebrated _Beggar’s Opera_
  of Gay, which has had such an amazing run in England. We are here in
  the very worst company imaginable; the _Dramatis Personæ_ are robbers,
  pickpockets, gaolers, prostitutes, and the like; yet we are highly
  amused, and in no haste to quit them; and why? Because there is
  nothing in the world more original or more natural. There is no
  occasion to compare our most celebrated comic operas with this, to see
  how far we are removed from truth and nature, and this is the reason
  that, notwithstanding our wit, we are almost always flat and insipid.
  Two faults are generally committed by our writers, which they seem
  incapable of avoiding. They think they have done wonders if they have
  only faithfully copied the dictionaries of the personages they bring
  upon the stage, forgetting that the great art is to chuse the moments
  of character and passion in those who are to speak, since it is those
  moments alone that render them interesting. For want of this
  discrimination, the piece necessarily sinks into insipidity and
  monotony. Why do almost all M. Vade’s pieces fatigue the audience to
  death? Because all his characters speak the same language; because
  each is a perfect resemblance of the other. Instead of this, in the
  _Beggar’s Opera_, among eight or ten girls of the town, each has her
  separate character, her peculiar traits, her peculiar modes of
  expression, which give her a marked distinction from her
  companions.’—Vol. i. p. 185.

Footnote 47:

  He who speaks two languages has no country. The French, when they made
  their language the common language of the Courts of Europe, gained
  more than by all their subsequent conquests.

Footnote 48:

  There is, however, in the African physiognomy a grandeur and a force,
  arising from this uniform character of violence and abruptness. It is
  consistent with itself throughout. Entire deformity can only be found
  where the features have not only no symmetry or softness in
  themselves, but have no connection with one another, presenting every
  variety of wretchedness, and a jumble of all sorts of defects, such as
  we see in Hogarth or in the streets of London; for instance, a large
  bottle-nose, with a small mouth twisted awry.

Footnote 49:

  The following version, communicated by a classical friend, is exact
  and elegant:

           ‘He said; and strait the herald Argicide
           Beneath his feet his winged sandals tied,
           Immortal, golden, that his flight could bear
           O’er seas and lands, like waftage of the air.
           His rod too, that can close the eyes of men
           In balmy sleep, and open them again,
           He took, and holding it in hand, went flying:
           Till, from Pieria’s top the sea descrying,
           Down to it sheer he dropp’d; and scour’d away
           Like the wild gull, that, fishing o’er the bay,
           Flaps on, with pinions dipping in the brine;—
           So went on the far sea the shape divine.’

                                             _Odyssey_, book v.

                  ——‘That was Arion crown’d:—
            So went he playing on the wat’ry plain.’

                                              _Faerie Queen._

  There is a striking description in Mr. Burke’s Reflections of the late
  Queen of France, whose charms had left their poison in the heart of
  this Irish orator and patriot, and set the world in a ferment sixteen
  years afterwards. ‘And surely never lighted on this orb, which she
  hardly seemed to touch, a more delightful vision.’ The idea is in Don
  Quixote, where the Duenna speaks of the air with which the Duchess
  ‘treads, or rather seems to disdain the ground she walks on.’ We have
  heard the same account of the gracefulness of Marie Antoinette from an
  artist, who saw her at Versailles much about the same time that Mr.
  Burke did. He stood in one corner of a little antechamber, and as the
  doors were narrow, she was obliged to pass sideways with her hoop. She
  glided by him in an instant, as if borne on a cloud.

Footnote 50:

  In a fruit or flower-piece by Vanhuysum, the minutest details acquire
  a certain grace and beauty from the delicacy with which they are
  finished. The eye dwells with a giddy delight on the liquid drops of
  dew, on the gauze wings of an insect, on the hair and feathers of a
  bird’s nest, the streaked and speckled egg-shells, the fine legs of
  the little travelling caterpillar. Who will suppose that the painter
  had not the same pleasure in detecting these nice distinctions in
  nature, that the critic has in tracing them in the picture?

Footnote 51:

  We here allude particularly to Turner, the ablest landscape painter
  now living, whose pictures are, however, too much abstractions of
  aerial perspective, and representations not so properly of the objects
  of nature as of the medium through which they are seen. They are the
  triumph of the knowledge of the artist, and of the power of the pencil
  over the barrenness of the subject. They are pictures of the elements
  of air, earth, and water. The artist delights to go back to the first
  chaos of the world, or to that state of things when the waters were
  separated from the dry land, and light from darkness, but as yet no
  living thing nor tree bearing fruit was seen upon the face of the
  earth. All is ‘without form and void.’ Some one said of his landscapes
  that they were _pictures of nothing, and very like_.

Footnote 52:

  Raphael not only could not paint a landscape; he could not paint
  people in a landscape. He could not have painted the heads or the
  figures, or even the dresses, of the St. Peter Martyr. His figures
  have always an _in-door_ look, that is, a set, determined, voluntary,
  dramatic character, arising from their own passions, or a watchfulness
  of those of others, and want that wild uncertainty of expression,
  which is connected with the accidents of nature and the changes of the
  elements. He has nothing _romantic_ about him.

Footnote 53:

  A good-natured man will always have a smack of pedantry about him. A
  lawyer, who talks about law, _certioraris_, _noli prosequis_, and silk
  gowns, though he may be a blockhead, is by no means dangerous. It is a
  very bad sign (unless where it arises from singular modesty) when you
  cannot tell a man’s profession from his conversation. Such persons
  either feel no interest in what concerns them most, or do not express
  what they feel. ‘Not to admire any thing’ is a very unsafe rule. A
  London apprentice, who did not admire the Lord Mayor’s coach, would
  stand a good chance of being hanged. We know but one person absurd
  enough to have formed his whole character on the above maxim of
  Horace, and who affects a superiority over others from an uncommon
  degree of natural and artificial stupidity.

Footnote 54:

  ‘Je crois que l’imagination étoit la première de ses facultés, et
  qu’elle absorboit même toutes les autres.’—P. 80.

Footnote 55:

  ‘Il avoit une grande puissance de raison sur les matieres abstraites,
  sur les objets qui n’ont de réalité que dans la pensée,’ etc.—P. 81.

Footnote 56:

  He did more towards the French Revolution than any other man.
  Voltaire, by his wit and penetration, had rendered superstition
  contemptible, and tyranny odious: but it was Rousseau who brought the
  feeling of irreconcilable enmity to rank and privileges, _above
  humanity_, home to the bosom of every man,—identified it with all the
  pride of intellect, and with the deepest yearnings of the human heart.

Footnote 57:

  We shall here give one passage as an example, which has always
  appeared to us the very perfection of this kind of personal and local
  description. It is that where he gives an account of his being one of
  the choristers at the Cathedral at Chambery: ‘On jugera bien que la
  vie de la maîtrise toujours chantante et gaie, avec les Musiciens et
  les Enfans de chœur, me plaisoit plus que celle du Séminaire avec les
  Peres de S. Lazare. Cependant, cette vie, pour être plus libre, n’en
  étoit pas moins égale et réglée. J’étois fait pour aimer
  l’indépendance et pour n’en abuser jamais. Durant six mois entiers, je
  ne sortis pas une seule fois, que pour aller chez Maman ou à l’Église,
  et je n’en fus pas même tenté. Cette intervalle est un de ceux où j’ai
  vécu dans le plus grand calme, et que je me suis rappelé avec le plus
  de plaisir. Dans les situations diverses où je me suis trouvé,
  quelques uns out été marqués par un tel sentiment de bien-être, qu’en
  les remémorant j’en suis affecté comme si j’y étois encore. Non
  seulement je me rappelle les tems, les lieux, les personnes, mais tous
  les objets environnans, la température de l’air, son odeur, sa
  couleur, une certaine impression locale qui ne s’est fait sentir que
  là, et dont le souvenir vif m’y transporte de nouveau. Par exemple,
  tout ce qu’on répétait a la maîtrise, tout ce qu’on chantoit au chœur,
  tout ce qu’on y faisoit, le bel et noble habit des Chanoines, les
  hasubles des Prêtres, les mitres des Chantres, la figure des
  Musiciens, un vieux Charpentier boiteux qui jouoit de la contrebasse,
  un petit Abbé biondin qui jouoit du violon, le lambeau de soutane
  qu’après avoir posé son épée, M. le Maître endossoit par-dessus son
  habit laïque, et le beau surplis fin dont il en couvrait les loques
  pour aller au chœur; l’orgueil avec lequel j’allois, tenant ma petite
  flûte à bec, m’établir dans l’orchestre, à la tribune, pour un petit
  bout de récit que M. le Maître avoit fait exprès pour moi: le bon
  diner qui nous attendoit ensuite, le bon appétit qu’on y portoit:—ce
  concours d’objets vivement retracé m’a cent fois charmé dans ma
  mémoire, autant et plus que dans la realité. J’ai gardé toujours une
  affection tendre pour un certain air du _Conditor alme syderum_ qui
  marche par iambes; parce qu’un Dimanche de l’Avent j’entendis de mon
  lit chanter cette hymne, avant le jour, sur le perron de la
  Cathédrale, selon un rite de cette eglise là. Mlle. _Merceret_, femme
  de chambre de Maman, savoit un peu de musique; je n’oublierai jamais
  un petit motet _afferte_, que M. le Maître me fit chanter avec elle,
  et que sa maîtresse écoutait avec tant de plaisir. Enfin tout, jusqu’à
  la bonne servante _Perrine_, qui étoit si bonne fille, et que les
  enfans de chœur faisoient tant endêver—tout dans les souvenirs de ces
  tems de bonheur et d’innocence revient souvent me ravir et
  m’attrister.’—_Confessions_, LIV. iii. p. 283.

Footnote 58:

  Burns, when about to sail for America after the first publication of
  his poems, consoled himself with ‘the delicious thought of being
  regarded as a clever fellow, though on the other side of the
  Atlantic.’

Footnote 59:

  This man (Burke) who was a half poet and a half philosopher, has done
  more mischief than perhaps any other person in the world. His
  understanding was not competent to the discovery of any truth, but it
  was sufficient to palliate a falsehood; his reasons, of little weight
  in themselves, thrown into the scale of power, were dreadful. Without
  genius to adorn the beautiful, he had the art to throw a dazzling veil
  over the deformed and disgusting; and to strew the flowers of
  imagination over the rotten carcass of corruption, not to prevent, but
  to communicate the infection. His jealousy of Rousseau was one chief
  cause of his opposition to the French Revolution. The writings of the
  one had changed the institutions of a kingdom; while the speeches of
  the other, with the intrigues of his whole party, had changed nothing
  but the _turnspit of the King’s kitchen_. He would have blotted out
  the broad pure light of Heaven, because it did not first shine in at
  the little Gothic windows of St. Stephen’s Chapel. The genius of
  Rousseau had levelled the towers of the Bastile with the dust; our
  zealous reformist, who would rather be doing mischief than nothing,
  tried, therefore, to patch them up again, by calling that loathsome
  dungeon the King’s castle, and by fulsome adulation of the virtues of
  a Court strumpet. This man,—but enough of him here.

Footnote 60:

  This word is not English.

Footnote 61:

  Written in 1806.

Footnote 62:

  Plato’s cave, in which he supposes a man to be shut up all his life
  with his back to the light, and to see nothing of the figures of men,
  or other objects that pass by, but their shadows on the opposite wall
  of his cell, so that when he is let out and sees the real figures, he
  is only dazzled and confounded by them, seems an ingenious satire on
  the life of a book-worm.

Footnote 63:

  The following lively description of this actress is given by Cibber in
  his Apology:—

  ‘What found most employment for her whole various excellence at once,
  was the part of Melantha, in Marriage-à-la-mode. Melantha is as
  finished an impertinent as ever fluttered in a drawing-room, and seems
  to contain the most complete system of female foppery that could
  possibly be crowded into the tortured form of a fine lady. Her
  language, dress, motion, manners, soul, and body, are in a continual
  hurry to be something more than is necessary or commendable. And
  though I doubt it will be a vain labour to offer you a just likeness
  of Mrs. Montfort’s action, yet the fantastic impression is still so
  strong in my memory, that I cannot help saying something, though
  fantastically, about it. The first ridiculous airs that break from her
  are upon a gallant never seen before, who delivers her a letter from
  her father, recommending him to her good graces as an honourable
  lover. Here now, one would think she might naturally shew a little of
  the sex’s decent reserve, though never so slightly covered! No, sir;
  not a tittle of it; modesty is the virtue of a poor-soul’d country
  gentlewoman: she is too much a court-lady, to be under so vulgar a
  confusion: she reads the letter, therefore, with a careless, dropping
  lip, and an erected brow, humming it hastily over, as if she were
  impatient to outgo her father’s commands, by making a complete
  conquest of him at once: and that the letter might not embarrass her
  attack, crack! she crumbles it at once into her palm, and pours upon
  him her whole artillery of airs, eyes, and motion; down goes her
  dainty, diving body to the ground, as if she were sinking under the
  conscious load of her own attractions; then launches into a flood of
  fine language and compliment, still playing her chest forward in fifty
  falls and risings, like a swan upon waving water; and, to complete her
  impertinence, she is so rapidly fond of her own wit, that she will not
  give her lover leave to praise it: Silent assenting bows, and vain
  endeavours to speak, are all the share of the conversation he is
  admitted to, which at last he is relieved from, by her engagement to
  half a score visits, which she _swims_ from him to make, with a
  promise to return in a twinkling.’—_The Life of Colley Cibber_, p.
  138.




                    CHARACTERS OF SHAKESPEAR’S PLAYS


                          BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

The first edition of the _Characters of Shakespear’s Plays_ (5½ in. × 9
in.) was published in 1817. The imprint reads thus:—London: | Printed by
C. H. Reynell, 21, Piccadilly, | for R. Hunter, successor to Mr.
Johnson, | in St. Paul’s Church-yard; | and C. and J. Ollier, |
Welbeck-street, Cavendish-square. | 1817. The second edition was issued
in the following year, and the imprint is:—London: | Printed for Taylor
and Hessey, | 93, Fleet Street. | 1818. There are several verbal
alterations in the second edition, and one curious _erratum_: ‘In
_Lear_, p. 173 [p. 269 present edition] dele line “Not an hour more nor
less.’” In the text of the play these words occur between ‘Fourscore and
upward’ and ‘And, to deal plainly.’ The second edition also was printed
by C. H. Reynell, Broad-street, Golden-square. No further edition was
published in Hazlitt’s lifetime, and the present issue has consequently
been printed from a copy of the second edition: the proofs, however,
have been read with a copy of the first edition, and one or two
misprints thereby corrected. In 1818 a pirated American edition was
published at Boston.

A contemporary criticism of the volume may be found in the _Edinburgh
Review_, 1817, by Francis Jeffrey. See also E. L. Bulwer’s _Some
Thoughts on the Genius of Hazlitt_. One hundred pounds was paid to
Hazlitt by C. H. Reynell for the copyright, and the first edition, at
half a guinea, was sold in six weeks: an adverse criticism by William
Gifford in the _Quarterly Review_ (No. 36, January 1818) spoiled the
sale of the second edition.

The following announcement appears on the back of the half-title of the
second edition:—‘This day is published, Lectures on the English Poets,
delivered at the Surry Institution, By William Hazlitt. In one vol. 8vo.
price 10s. 6d.’




                                   TO

                           CHARLES LAMB, ESQ.

                 THIS VOLUME IS INSCRIBED, AS A MARK OF

                             OLD FRIENDSHIP

                          AND LASTING ESTEEM,

                                                          BY THE AUTHOR.


                                CONTENTS

                                                                   PAGE

 Preface                                                             171

 Cymbeline                                                           179

 Macbeth                                                             186

 Julius Cæsar                                                        195

 Othello                                                             200

 Timon of Athens                                                     210

 Coriolanus                                                          214

 Troilus and Cressida                                                221

 Antony and Cleopatra                                                228

 Hamlet                                                              232

 The Tempest                                                         238

 The Midsummer Night’s Dream                                         244

 Romeo and Juliet                                                    248

 Lear                                                                257

 Richard II.                                                         272

 Henry IV. in Two Parts                                              277

 Henry V.                                                            285

 Henry VI. in Three Parts                                            292

 Richard III.                                                        298

 Henry VIII.                                                         303

 King John                                                           306

 Twelfth Night; or, What You Will                                    313

 The Two Gentlemen of Verona                                         318

 The Merchant of Venice                                              320

 The Winter’s Tale                                                   324

 All’s Well that Ends Well                                           329

 Love’s Labour’s Lost                                                332

 Much Ado About Nothing                                              335

 As You Like It                                                      338

 The Taming of the Shrew                                             341

 Measure for Measure                                                 345

 The Merry Wives of Windsor                                          349

 The Comedy of Errors                                                351

 Doubtful Plays of Shakespear                                        353

 Poems and Sonnets                                                   357


                                PREFACE

It is observed by Mr. Pope, that

  ‘If ever any author deserved the name of an _original_, it was
  Shakespear. Homer himself drew not his art so immediately from the
  fountains of nature; it proceeded through Ægyptian strainers and
  channels, and came to him not without some tincture of the learning,
  or some cast of the models, of those before him. The poetry of
  Shakespear was inspiration indeed: he is not so much an imitator, as
  an instrument of nature; and it is not so just to say that he speaks
  from her, as that she speaks through him.

  ‘His _characters_ are so much nature herself, that it is a sort of
  injury to call them by so distant a name as copies of her. Those of
  other poets have a constant resemblance, which shows that they
  received them from one another, and were but multipliers of the same
  image: each picture, like a mock-rainbow, is but the reflection of a
  reflection. But every single character in Shakespear, is as much an
  individual, as those in life itself; it is as impossible to find any
  two alike; and such, as from their relation or affinity in any
  respect appear most to be twins, will, upon comparison, be found
  remarkably distinct. To this life and variety of character, we must
  add the wonderful preservation of it; which is such throughout his
  plays, that had all the speeches been printed without the very names
  of the persons, I believe one might have applied them with certainty
  to every speaker.’

The object of the volume here offered to the public, is to illustrate
these remarks in a more particular manner by a reference to each play. A
gentleman of the name of Mason, the author of a Treatise on Ornamental
Gardening (not Mason the poet), began a work of a similar kind about
forty years ago, but he only lived to finish a parallel between the
characters of Macbeth and Richard III. which is an exceedingly ingenious
piece of analytical criticism. Richardson’s Essays include but a few of
Shakespear’s principal characters. The only work which seemed to
supersede the necessity of an attempt like the present was Schlegel’s
very admirable Lectures on the Drama, which give by far the best account
of the plays of Shakespear that has hitherto appeared. The only
circumstances in which it was thought not impossible to improve on the
manner in which the German critic has executed this part of his design,
were in avoiding an appearance of mysticism in his style, not very
attractive to the English reader, and in bringing illustrations from
particular passages of the plays themselves, of which Schlegel’s work,
from the extensiveness of his plan, did not admit. We will at the same
time confess, that some little jealousy of the character of the national
understanding was not without its share in producing the following
undertaking, for ‘we were piqued’ that it should be reserved for a
foreign critic to give ‘reasons for the faith which we English have in
Shakespear.’ Certainly no writer among ourselves has shown either the
same enthusiastic admiration of his genius, or the same philosophical
acuteness in pointing out his characteristic excellences. As we have
pretty well exhausted all we had to say upon this subject in the body of
the work, we shall here transcribe Schlegel’s general account of
Shakespear, which is in the following words:—

  ‘Never, perhaps, was there so comprehensive a talent for the
  delineation of character as Shakespear’s. It not only grasps the
  diversities of rank, sex, and age, down to the dawnings of infancy;
  not only do the king and the beggar, the hero and the pickpocket,
  the sage and the idiot speak and act with equal truth; not only does
  he transport himself to distant ages and foreign nations, and
  pourtray in the most accurate manner, with only a few apparent
  violations of costume, the spirit of the ancient Romans, of the
  French in their wars with the English, of the English themselves
  during a great part of their history, of the Southern Europeans (in
  the serious part of many comedies) the cultivated society of that
  time, and the former rude and barbarous state of the North; his
  human characters have not only such depth and precision that they
  cannot be arranged under classes, and are inexhaustible, even in
  conception:—no—this Prometheus not merely forms men, he opens the
  gates of the magical world of spirits; calls up the midnight ghost;
  exhibits before us his witches amidst their unhallowed mysteries;
  peoples the air with sportive fairies and sylphs:—and these beings,
  existing only in imagination, possess such truth and consistency,
  that even when deformed monsters like Caliban, he extorts the
  conviction, that if there should be such beings, they would so
  conduct themselves. In a word, as he carries with him the most
  fruitful and daring fancy into the kingdom of nature,—on the other
  hand, he carries nature into the regions of fancy, lying beyond the
  confines of reality. We are lost in astonishment at seeing the
  extraordinary, the wonderful, and the unheard of, in such intimate
  nearness.

  ‘If Shakespear deserves our admiration for his characters, he is
  equally deserving of it for his exhibition of passion, taking this
  word in its widest signification, as including every mental
  condition, every tone from indifference or familiar mirth to the
  wildest rage and despair. He gives us the history of minds; he lays
  open to us, in a single word, a whole series of preceding
  conditions. His passions do not at first stand displayed to us in
  all their height, as is the case with so many tragic poets, who, in
  the language of Lessing, are thorough masters of the legal style of
  love. He paints, in a most inimitable manner, the gradual progress
  from the first origin. “He gives,” as Lessing says, “a living
  picture of all the most minute and secret artifices by which a
  feeling steals into our souls; of all the imperceptible advantages
  which it there gains; of all the stratagems by which every other
  passion is made subservient to it, till it becomes the sole tyrant
  of our desires and our aversions.” Of all poets, perhaps, he alone
  has pourtrayed the mental diseases,—melancholy, delirium,
  lunacy,—with such inexpressible, and, in every respect, definite
  truth, that the physician may enrich his observations from them in
  the same manner as from real cases.

  ‘And yet Johnson has objected to Shakespear, that his pathos is not
  always natural and free from affectation. There are, it is true,
  passages, though, comparatively speaking, very few, where his poetry
  exceeds the bounds of true dialogue, where a too soaring
  imagination, a too luxuriant wit, rendered the complete dramatic
  forgetfulness of himself impossible. With this exception, the
  censure originates only in a fanciless way of thinking, to which
  everything appears unnatural that does not suit its own tame
  insipidity. Hence, an idea has been formed of simple and natural
  pathos, which consists in exclamations destitute of imagery, and
  nowise elevated above every-day life. But energetical passions
  electrify the whole of the mental powers, and will, consequently, in
  highly favoured natures, express themselves in an ingenious and
  figurative manner. It has been often remarked, that indignation
  gives wit; and, as despair occasionally breaks out into laughter, it
  may sometimes also give vent to itself in antithetical comparisons.

  ‘Besides, the rights of the poetical form have not been duly
  weighed. Shakespear, who was always sure of his object, to move in a
  sufficiently powerful manner when he wished to do so, has
  occasionally, by indulging in a freer play, purposely moderated the
  impressions when too painful, and immediately introduced a musical
  alleviation of our sympathy. He had not those rude ideas of his art
  which many moderns seem to have, as if the poet, like the clown in
  the proverb, must strike twice on the same place. An ancient
  rhetorician delivered a caution against dwelling too long on the
  excitation of pity; for nothing, he said, dries so soon as tears;
  and Shakespear acted conformably to this ingenious maxim, without
  knowing it.

  ‘The objection, that Shakespear wounds our feelings by the open
  display of the most disgusting moral odiousness, harrows up the mind
  unmercifully, and tortures even our senses by the exhibition of the
  most insupportable and hateful spectacles, is one of much greater
  importance. He has never, in fact, varnished over wild and
  bloodthirsty passions with a pleasing exterior,—never clothed crime
  and want of principle with a false show of greatness of soul; and in
  that respect he is every way deserving of praise. Twice he has
  pourtrayed downright villains; and the masterly way in which he has
  contrived to elude impressions of too painful a nature, may be seen
  in Iago and Richard the Third. The constant reference to a petty and
  puny race must cripple the boldness of the poet. Fortunately for his
  art, Shakespear lived in an age extremely susceptible of noble and
  tender impressions, but which had still enough of the firmness
  inherited from a vigorous olden time not to shrink back with dismay
  from every strong and violent picture. We have lived to see
  tragedies of which the catastrophe consists in the swoon of an
  enamoured princess. If Shakespear falls occasionally into the
  opposite extreme, it is a noble error, originating in the fulness of
  a gigantic strength: and yet this tragical Titan, who storms the
  heavens, and threatens to tear the world from off its hinges; who,
  more terrible than Æschylus, makes our hair stand on end, and
  congeals our blood with horror, possessed, at the same time, the
  insinuating loveliness of the sweetest poetry. He plays with love
  like a child; and his songs are breathed out like melting sighs. He
  unites in his genius the utmost elevation and the utmost depth; and
  the most foreign, and even apparently irreconcileable properties
  subsist in him peaceably together. The world of spirits and nature
  have laid all their treasures at his feet. In strength a demi-god,
  in profundity of view a prophet, in all-seeing wisdom a protecting
  spirit of a higher order, he lowers himself to mortals, as if
  unconscious of his superiority: and is as open and unassuming as a
  child.

  ‘Shakespear’s comic talent is equally wonderful with that which he
  has shown in the pathetic and tragic: it stands on an equal
  elevation, and possesses equal extent and profundity. All that I
  before wished was, not to admit that the former preponderated. He is
  highly inventive in comic situations and motives. It will be hardly
  possible to show whence he has taken any of them; whereas, in the
  serious part of his drama, he has generally laid hold of something
  already known. His comic characters are equally true, various, and
  profound, with his serious. So little is he disposed to caricature,
  that we may rather say many of his traits are almost too nice and
  delicate for the stage, that they can only be properly seized by a
  great actor, and fully understood by a very acute audience. Not only
  has he delineated many kinds of folly; he has also contrived to
  exhibit mere stupidity in a most diverting and entertaining
  manner.’—Vol. ii. p. 145.

We have the rather availed ourselves of this testimony of a foreign
critic in behalf of Shakespear, because our own countryman, Dr. Johnson,
has not been so favourable to him. It may be said of Shakespear, that
‘those who are not for him are against him’: for indifference is here
the height of injustice. We may sometimes, in order ‘to do a great
right, do a little wrong.’ An overstrained enthusiasm is more pardonable
with respect to Shakespear than the want of it; for our admiration
cannot easily surpass his genius. We have a high respect for Dr.
Johnson’s character and understanding, mixed with something like
personal attachment: but he was neither a poet nor a judge of poetry. He
might in one sense be a judge of poetry as it falls within the limits
and rules of prose, but not as it is poetry. Least of all was he
qualified to be a judge of Shakespear, who ‘alone is high fantastical.’
Let those who have a prejudice against Johnson read Boswell’s Life of
him; as those whom he has prejudiced against Shakespear should read his
Irene. We do not say that a man to be a critic must necessarily be a
poet: but to be a good critic, he ought not to be a bad poet. Such
poetry as a man deliberately writes, such, and such only will he like.
Dr. Johnson’s Preface to his edition of Shakespear looks like a
laborious attempt to bury the characteristic merits of his author under
a load of cumbrous phraseology, and to weigh his excellences and defects
in equal scales, stuffed full of ‘swelling figures and sonorous
epithets.’ Nor could it well be otherwise; Dr. Johnson’s general powers
of reasoning overlaid his critical susceptibility. All his ideas were
cast in a given mould, in a set form: they were made out by rule and
system, by climax, inference, and antithesis:—Shakespear’s were the
reverse. Johnson’s understanding dealt only in round numbers: the
fractions were lost upon him. He reduced everything to the common
standard of conventional propriety; and the most exquisite refinement or
sublimity produced an effect on his mind, only as they could be
translated into the language of measured prose. To him an excess of
beauty was a fault; for it appeared to him like an excrescence; and his
imagination was dazzled by the blaze of light. His writings neither
shone with the beams of native genius, nor reflected them. The shifting
shapes of fancy, the rainbow hues of things, made no impression on him:
he seized only on the permanent and tangible. He had no idea of natural
objects but ‘such as he could measure with a two-foot rule, or tell upon
ten fingers’: he judged of human nature in the same way, by mood and
figure: he saw only the definite, the positive, and the practical, the
average forms of things, not their striking differences—their classes,
not their degrees. He was a man of strong common sense and practical
wisdom, rather than of genius or feeling. He retained the regular,
habitual impressions of actual objects, but he could not follow the
rapid flights of fancy, or the strong movements of passion. That is, he
was to the poet what the painter of still life is to the painter of
history. Common sense sympathises with the impressions of things on
ordinary minds in ordinary circumstances: genius catches the glancing
combinations presented to the eye of fancy, under the influence of
passion. It is the province of the didactic reasoner to take cognizance
of those results of human nature which are constantly repeated and
always the same, which follow one another in regular succession, which
are acted upon by large classes of men, and embodied in received
customs, laws, language, and institutions; and it was in arranging,
comparing, and arguing on these kind of general results, that Johnson’s
excellence lay. But he could not quit his hold of the common-place and
mechanical, and apply the general rule to the particular exception, or
shew how the nature of man was modified by the workings of passion, or
the infinite fluctuations of thought and accident. Hence he could judge
neither of the heights nor depths of poetry. Nor is this all; for being
conscious of great powers in himself, and those powers of an adverse
tendency to those of his author, he would be for setting up a foreign
jurisdiction over poetry, and making criticism a kind of Procrustes’ bed
of genius, where he might cut down imagination to matter-of-fact,
regulate the passions according to reason, and translate the whole into
logical diagrams and rhetorical declamation. Thus he says of
Shakespear’s characters, in contradiction to what Pope had observed, and
to what every one else feels, that each character is a species, instead
of being an individual. He in fact found the general species or
_didactic_ form in Shakespear’s characters, which was all he sought or
cared for; he did not find the individual traits, or the _dramatic_
distinctions which Shakespear has engrafted on this general nature,
because he felt no interest in them. Shakespear’s bold and happy flights
of imagination were equally thrown away upon our author. He was not only
without any particular fineness of organic sensibility, alive to all the
‘mighty world of ear and eye,’ which is necessary to the painter or
musician, but without that intenseness of passion, which, seeking to
exaggerate whatever excites the feelings of pleasure or power in the
mind, and moulding the impressions of natural objects according to the
impulses of imagination, produces a genius and a taste for poetry.
According to Dr. Johnson, a mountain is sublime, or a rose is beautiful;
for that their name and definition imply. But he would no more be able
to give the description of Dover cliff in _Lear_, or the description of
flowers in _The Winter’s Tale_, than to describe the objects of a sixth
sense; nor do we think he would have any very profound feeling of the
beauty of the passages here referred to. A stately common-place, such as
Congreve’s description of a ruin in the _Mourning Bride_, would have
answered Johnson’s purpose just as well, or better than the first; and
an indiscriminate profusion of scents and hues would have interfered
less with the ordinary routine of his imagination than Perdita’s lines,
which seem enamoured of their own sweetness—

                        ——‘Daffodils
              That come before the swallow dares, and take
              The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
              But sweeter than the lids of Juno’s eyes,
              Or Cytherea’s breath.’—

No one who does not feel the passion which these objects inspire can go
along with the imagination which seeks to express that passion and the
uneasy sense of delight accompanying it by something still more
beautiful, and no one can feel this passionate love of nature without
quick natural sensibility. To a mere literal and formal apprehension,
the inimitably characteristic epithet, ‘violets _dim_,’ must seem to
imply a defect, rather than a beauty; and to any one, not feeling the
full force of that epithet, which suggests an image like ‘the sleepy eye
of love,’ the allusion to ‘the lids of Juno’s eyes’ must appear
extravagant and unmeaning. Shakespear’s fancy lent words and images to
the most refined sensibility to nature, struggling for expression: his
descriptions are identical with the things themselves, seen through the
fine medium of passion: strip them of that connection, and try them by
ordinary conceptions and ordinary rules, and they are as grotesque and
barbarous as you please!—By thus lowering Shakespear’s genius to the
standard of common-place invention, it was easy to show that his faults
were as great as his beauties; for the excellence, which consists merely
in a conformity to rules, is counterbalanced by the technical violation
of them. Another circumstance which led to Dr. Johnson’s indiscriminate
praise or censure of Shakespear, is the very structure of his style.
Johnson wrote a kind of rhyming prose, in which he was as much compelled
to finish the different clauses of his sentences, and to balance one
period against another, as the writer of heroic verse is to keep to
lines of ten syllables with similar terminations. He no sooner
acknowledges the merits of his author in one line than the periodical
revolution of his style carries the weight of his opinion completely
over to the side of objection, thus keeping up a perpetual alternation
of perfections and absurdities. We do not otherwise know how to account
for such assertions as the following:—

  ‘In his tragic scenes, there is always something wanting, but his
  comedy often surpasses expectation or desire. His comedy pleases by
  the thoughts and the language, and his tragedy, for the greater
  part, by incident and action. His tragedy seems to be skill, his
  comedy to be instinct.’

Yet after saying that ‘his tragedy was skill,’ he affirms in the next
page,

  ‘His declamations or set speeches are commonly cold and weak, _for
  his power was the power of nature_: when he endeavoured, like other
  tragic writers, to catch opportunities of amplification, and instead
  of inquiring what the occasion demanded, to shew how much his stores
  of knowledge could supply, he seldom escapes without the pity or
  resentment of his reader.’

Poor Shakespear! Between the charges here brought against him, of want
of nature in the first instance, and of want of skill in the second, he
could hardly escape being condemned. And again,

  ‘But the admirers of this great poet have most reason to complain
  when he approaches nearest to his highest excellence, and seems
  fully resolved to sink them in dejection, or mollify them with
  tender emotions by the fall of greatness, the danger of innocence,
  or the crosses of love. What he does best, he soon ceases to do. He
  no sooner begins to move than he counteracts himself; and terror and
  pity, as they are rising in the mind, are checked and blasted by
  sudden frigidity.’

In all this, our critic seems more bent on maintaining the equilibrium
of his style than the consistency or truth of his opinions.—If Dr.
Johnson’s opinion was right, the following observations on Shakespear’s
Plays must be greatly exaggerated, if not ridiculous. If he was wrong,
what has been said may perhaps account for his being so, without
detracting from his ability and judgment in other things.

It is proper to add, that the account of the _Midsummer’s Night’s Dream_
has appeared in another work.[64]

 _April 15, 1817._




                    CHARACTERS OF SHAKESPEAR’S PLAYS


                               CYMBELINE

CYMBELINE is one of the most delightful of Shakespear’s historical
plays. It may be considered as a dramatic romance, in which the most
striking parts of the story are thrown into the form of a dialogue, and
the intermediate circumstances are explained by the different speakers,
as occasion renders it necessary. The action is less concentrated in
consequence; but the interest becomes more aerial and refined from the
principle of perspective introduced into the subject by the imaginary
changes of scene, as well as by the length of time it occupies. The
reading of this play is like going a journey with some uncertain object
at the end of it, and in which the suspense is kept up and heightened by
the long intervals between each action. Though the events are scattered
over such an extent of surface, and relate to such a variety of
characters, yet the links which bind the different interests of the
story together are never entirely broken. The most straggling and
seemingly casual incidents are contrived in such a manner as to lead at
last to the most complete developement of the catastrophe. The ease and
conscious unconcern with which this is effected only makes the skill
more wonderful. The business of the plot evidently thickens in the last
act: the story moves forward with increasing rapidity at every step; its
various ramifications are drawn from the most distant points to the same
centre; the principal characters are brought together, and placed in
very critical situations; and the fate of almost every person in the
drama is made to depend on the solution of a single circumstance—the
answer of Iachimo to the question of Imogen respecting the obtaining of
the ring from Posthumus. Dr. Johnson is of opinion that Shakespear was
generally inattentive to the winding-up of his plots. We think the
contrary is true; and we might cite in proof of this remark not only the
present play, but the conclusion of _Lear_, of _Romeo and Juliet_, of
_Macbeth_, of _Othello_, even of _Hamlet_, and of other plays of less
moment, in which the last act is crowded with decisive events brought
about by natural and striking means.

The pathos in CYMBELINE is not violent or tragical, but of the most
pleasing and amiable kind. A certain tender gloom overspreads the whole.
Posthumus is the ostensible hero of the piece, but its greatest charm is
the character of Imogen. Posthumus is only interesting from the interest
she takes in him; and she is only interesting herself from her
tenderness and constancy to her husband. It is the peculiar excellence
of Shakespear’s heroines, that they seem to exist only in their
attachment to others. They are pure abstractions of the affections. We
think as little of their persons as they do themselves, because we are
let into the secrets of their hearts, which are more important. We are
too much interested in their affairs to stop to look at their faces,
except by stealth and at intervals. No one ever hit the true perfection
of the female character, the sense of weakness leaning on the strength
of its affections for support, so well as Shakespear—no one ever so well
painted natural tenderness free from affectation and disguise—no one
else ever so well shewed how delicacy and timidity, when driven to
extremity, grow romantic and extravagant; for the romance of his
heroines (in which they abound) is only an excess of the habitual
prejudices of their sex, scrupulous of being false to their vows, truant
to their affections, and taught by the force of feeling when to forego
the forms of propriety for the essence of it. His women were in this
respect exquisite logicians; for there is nothing so logical as passion.
They knew their own minds exactly; and only followed up a favourite
purpose, which they had sworn to with their tongues, and which was
engraven on their hearts, into its untoward consequences. They were the
prettiest little set of martyrs and confessors on record.—Cibber, in
speaking of the early English stage, accounts for the want of prominence
and theatrical display in Shakespear’s female characters from the
circumstance, that women in those days were not allowed to play the
parts of women, which made it necessary to keep them a good deal in the
back-ground. Does not this state of manners itself, which prevented
their exhibiting themselves in public, and confined them to the
relations and charities of domestic life, afford a truer explanation of
the matter? His women are certainly very unlike stage-heroines; the
reverse of tragedy-queens.

We have almost as great an affection for Imogen as she had for
Posthumus; and she deserves it better. Of all Shakespear’s women she is
perhaps the most tender and the most artless. Her incredulity in the
opening scene with Iachimo, as to her husband’s infidelity, is much the
same as Desdemona’s backwardness to believe Othello’s jealousy. Her
answer to the most distressing part of the picture is only, ‘My lord, I
fear, has forgot Britain.’ Her readiness to pardon Iachimo’s false
imputations and his designs against herself, is a good lesson to prudes;
and may shew that where there is a real attachment to virtue, it has no
need to bolster itself up with an outrageous or affected antipathy to
vice. The scene in which Pisanio gives Imogen his master’s letter,
accusing her of incontinency on the treacherous suggestions of Iachimo,
is as touching as it is possible for anything to be:—

        ‘_Pisanio._ What cheer, Madam?

        _Imogen._ False to his bed! What is it to be false?
        To lie in watch there, and to think on him?
        To weep ‘twixt clock and clock? If sleep charge nature,
        To break it with a fearful dream of him,
        And cry myself awake? That’s false to ‘s bed, is it?

        _Pisanio._ Alas, good lady!

        _Imogen._ I false? thy conscience witness, Iachimo,
        Thou didst accuse him of incontinency,
        Thou then look’dst like a villain: now methinks,
        Thy favour’s good enough. Some Jay of Italy,
        Whose mother was her painting, hath betray’d him:
        Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion,
        And for I am richer than to hang by th’ walls,
        I must be ript; to pieces with me. Oh,
        Men’s vows are women’s traitors. All good seeming
        By thy revolt, oh husband, shall be thought
        Put on for villainy: not born where ‘t grows,
        But worn a bait for ladies.

        _Pisanio._ Good Madam, hear me—

        _Imogen._ Talk thy tongue weary, speak:
        I have heard I am a strumpet, and mine ear,
        Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
        Nor tent to bottom that.’——

When Pisanio, who had been charged to kill his mistress, puts her in a
way to live, she says,

              ‘Why, good fellow,
            What shall I do the while? Where bide? How live?
            Or in my life what comfort, when I am
            Dead to my husband?’

Yet when he advises her to disguise herself in boy’s clothes, and
suggests ‘a course pretty and full in view,’ by which she may ‘happily
be near the residence of Posthumus,’ she exclaims—

                ‘Oh, for such means,
              Though peril to my modesty, not death on ‘t,
              I would adventure.’

And when Pisanio, enlarging on the consequences, tells her she must
change

                       ——‘Fear and niceness,
             The handmaids of all women, or more truly,
             Woman its pretty self, into a waggish courage,
             Ready in gibes, quick-answer’d, saucy, and
             As quarrellous as the weazel’——

she interrupts him hastily—

                     ‘Nay, be brief;
                   I see into thy end, and am almost
                   A man already.’

In her journey thus disguised to Milford-Haven, she loses her guide and
her way; and unbosoming her complaints, says beautifully—

                      ——‘My dear lord,
          Thou art one of the false ones; now I think on thee,
          My hunger’s gone; but even before, I was
          At point to sink for food.’

She afterwards finds, as she thinks, the dead body of Posthumus, and
engages herself as a footboy to serve a Roman officer, when she has done
all due obsequies to him whom she calls her former master—

                    ——‘And when
        With wild wood-leaves and weeds I ha’ strew’d his grave,
        And on it said a century of pray’rs,
        Such as I can, twice o’er, I ‘ll weep and sigh,
        And leaving so his service, follow you,
        So please you entertain me.’

Now this is the very religion of love. She all along relies little on
her personal charms, which she fears may have been eclipsed by some
painted Jay of Italy; she relies on her merit, and her merit is in the
depth of her love, her truth and constancy. Our admiration of her beauty
is excited with as little consciousness as possible on her part. There
are two delicious descriptions given of her, one when she is asleep, and
one when she is supposed dead. Arviragus thus addresses her—

                    ——‘With fairest flowers,
          While summer lasts, and I live here, Fidele,
          I’ll sweeten thy sad grave; thou shalt not lack
          The flow’r that’s like thy face, pale primrose, nor
          The azur’d hare-bell, like thy veins, no, nor
          The leaf of eglantine, which not to slander,
          Out-sweeten’d not thy breath.’

The yellow Iachimo gives another thus, when he steals into her
bedchamber:—

                         ——‘Cytherea,
           How bravely thou becom’st thy bed! Fresh lily,
           And whiter than the sheets! That I might touch—
           But kiss, one kiss—’Tis her breathing that
           Perfumes the chamber thus: the flame o’ th’ taper
           Bows toward her, and would under-peep her lids
           To see th’ enclosed lights now canopied
           Under the windows, white and azure, laced
           With blue of Heav’n’s own tinct—on her left breast
           A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops
           I’ th’ bottom of a cowslip.’

There is a moral sense in the proud beauty of this last image, a rich
surfeit of the fancy,—as that well-known passage beginning, ‘Me of my
lawful pleasure she restrained, and prayed me oft forbearance,’ sets a
keener edge upon it by the inimitable picture of modesty and
self-denial.

The character of Cloten, the conceited, booby lord, and rejected lover
of Imogen, though not very agreeable in itself, and at present obsolete,
is drawn with much humour and quaint extravagance. The description which
Imogen gives of his unwelcome addresses to her—‘Whose love-suit hath
been to me as fearful as a siege’—is enough to cure the most ridiculous
lover of his folly. It is remarkable that though Cloten makes so poor a
figure in love, he is described as assuming an air of consequence as the
Queen’s son in a council of state, and with all the absurdity of his
person and manners, is not without shrewdness in his observations. So
true is it that folly is as often owing to a want of proper sentiments
as to a want of understanding! The exclamation of the ancient critic—Oh
Menander and Nature, which of you copied from the other! would not be
misapplied to Shakespear.

The other characters in this play are represented with great truth and
accuracy, and as it happens in most of the author’s works, there is not
only the utmost keeping in each separate character; but in the casting
of the different parts, and their relation to one another, there is an
affinity and harmony, like what we may observe in the gradations of
colour in a picture. The striking and powerful contrasts in which
Shakespear abounds could not escape observation; but the use he makes of
the principle of analogy to reconcile the greatest diversities of
character and to maintain a continuity of feeling throughout, has not
been sufficiently attended to. In CYMBELINE, for instance, the principal
interest arises out of the unalterable fidelity of Imogen to her husband
under the most trying circumstances. Now the other parts of the picture
are filled up with subordinate examples of the same feeling, variously
modified by different situations, and applied to the purposes of virtue
or vice. The plot is aided by the amorous importunities of Cloten, by
the persevering determination of Iachimo to conceal the defeat of his
project by a daring imposture: the faithful attachment of Pisanio to his
mistress is an affecting accompaniment to the whole; the obstinate
adherence to his purpose in Bellarius, who keeps the fate of the young
princes so long a secret in resentment for the ungrateful return to his
former services, the incorrigible wickedness of the Queen, and even the
blind uxorious confidence of Cymbeline, are all so many lines of the
same story, tending to the same point. The effect of this coincidence is
rather felt than observed; and as the impression exists unconsciously in
the mind of the reader, so it probably arose in the same manner in the
mind of the author, not from design, but from the force of natural
association, a particular train of thought suggesting different
inflections of the same predominant feeling, melting into, and
strengthening one another, like chords in music.

The characters of Bellarius, Guiderius, and Arviragus, and the romantic
scenes in which they appear, are a fine relief to the intrigues and
artificial refinements of the court from which they are banished.
Nothing can surpass the wildness and simplicity of the descriptions of
the mountain life they lead. They follow the business of huntsmen, not
of shepherds; and this is in keeping with the spirit of adventure and
uncertainty in the rest of the story, and with the scenes in which they
are afterwards called on to act. How admirably the youthful fire and
impatience to emerge from their obscurity in the young princes is
opposed to the cooler calculations and prudent resignation of their more
experienced counsellor! How well the disadvantages of knowledge and of
ignorance, of solitude and society, are placed against each other!

      ‘_Guiderius._ Out of your proof you speak: we poor unfledg’d
      Have never wing’d from view o’ th’ nest; nor know not
      What air’s from home. Haply this life is best,
      If quiet life is best; sweeter to you
      That have a sharper known; well corresponding
      With your stiff age: but unto us it is
      A cell of ignorance; travelling a-bed,
      A prison for a debtor, that not dares
      To stride a limit.

      _Arviragus._ What should we speak of
      When we are old as you? When we shall hear
      The rain and wind beat dark December! How,
      In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse
      The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing.
      We are beastly; subtle as the fox for prey,
      Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat:
      Our valour is to chase what flies; our cage
      We make a quire, as doth the prison’d bird,
      And sing our bondage freely.’

The answer of Bellarius to this expostulation is hardly satisfactory;
for nothing can be an answer to hope, or the passion of the mind for
unknown good, but experience.—The forest of Arden in _As You Like It_
can alone compare with the mountain scenes in CYMBELINE: yet how
different the contemplative quiet of the one from the enterprising
boldness and precarious mode of subsistence in the other! Shakespear not
only lets us into the minds of his characters, but gives a tone and
colour to the scenes he describes from the feelings of their supposed
inhabitants. He at the same time preserves the utmost propriety of
action and passion, and gives all their local accompaniments. If he was
equal to the greatest things, he was not above an attention to the
smallest. Thus the gallant sportsmen in CYMBELINE have to encounter the
abrupt declivities of hill and valley: Touchstone and Audrey jog along a
level path. The deer in CYMBELINE are only regarded as objects of prey,
‘The game’s a-foot,’ etc.—with Jaques they are fine subjects to moralise
upon at leisure, ‘under the shade of melancholy boughs.’

We cannot take leave of this play, which is a favourite with us, without
noticing some occasional touches of natural piety and morality. We may
allude here to the opening of the scene in which Bellarius instructs the
young princes to pay their orisons to heaven:

                 ——‘See, boys! this gate
       Instructs you how t’ adore the Heav’ns; and bows you
       To morning’s holy office.

       _Guiderius._ Hail, Heav’n!

       _Arviragus._ Hail, Heav’n!

       _Bellarius._ Now for our mountain-sport, up to yon hill.’

What a grace and unaffected spirit of piety breathes in this passage! In
like manner, one of the brothers says to the other, when about to
perform the funeral rites to Fidele,

            ‘Nay, Cadwall, we must lay his head to the east;
            My Father hath a reason for ‘t’—

—as if some allusion to the doctrines of the Christian faith had been
casually dropped in conversation by the old man, and had been no farther
inquired into.

Shakespear’s morality is introduced in the same simple, unobtrusive
manner. Imogen will not let her companions stay away from the chase to
attend her when sick, and gives her reason for it—

          ‘Stick to your journal course; _the breach of custom
          Is breach of all_!’

When the Queen attempts to disguise her motives for procuring the poison
from Cornelius, by saying she means to try its effects on ‘creatures not
worth the hanging,’ his answer conveys at once a tacit reproof of her
hypocrisy, and a useful lesson of humanity—

                      ——‘Your Highness
          Shall from this practice but make hard your heart.’


                                MACBETH

        ‘The poet’s eye in a fine frenzy rolling
        Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
        And as imagination bodies forth
        The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen
        Turns them to shape, and gives to airy nothing
        A local habitation and a name.’

MACBETH and _Lear_, _Othello_ and _Hamlet_, are usually reckoned
Shakespear’s four principal tragedies. _Lear_ stands first for the
profound intensity of the passion; MACBETH for the wildness of the
imagination and the rapidity of the action; _Othello_ for the
progressive interest and powerful alternations of feeling; _Hamlet_ for
the refined developement of thought and sentiment. If the force of
genius shewn in each of these works is astonishing, their variety is not
less so. They are like different creations of the same mind, not one of
which has the slightest reference to the rest. This distinctness and
originality is indeed the necessary consequence of truth and nature.
Shakespear’s genius alone appeared to possess the resources of nature.
He is ‘your only _tragedy-maker_.’ His plays have the force of things
upon the mind. What he represents is brought home to the bosom as a part
of our experience, implanted in the memory as if we had known the
places, persons, and things of which he treats. MACBETH is like a record
of a preternatural and tragical event. It has the rugged severity of an
old chronicle with all that the imagination of the poet can engraft upon
traditional belief. The castle of Macbeth, round which ‘the air smells
wooingly,’ and where ‘the temple-haunting martlet builds,’ has a real
subsistence in the mind; the Weïrd Sisters meet us in person on ‘the
blasted heath’; the ‘air-drawn dagger’ moves slowly before our eyes; the
‘gracious Duncan,’ the ‘blood-boultered Banquo’ stand before us; all
that passed through the mind of Macbeth passes, without the loss of a
tittle, through ours. All that could actually take place, and all that
is only possible to be conceived, what was said and what was done, the
workings of passion, the spells of magic, are brought before us with the
same absolute truth and vividness—Shakespear excelled in the openings of
his plays: that of MACBETH is the most striking of any. The wildness of
the scenery, the sudden shifting of the situations and characters, the
bustle, the expectations excited, are equally extraordinary. From the
first entrance of the Witches and the description of them when they meet
Macbeth,

                        ——‘What are these
            So wither’d and so wild in their attire,
            That look not like the inhabitants of th’ earth
            And yet are on’t?’

the mind is prepared for all that follows.

This tragedy is alike distinguished for the lofty imagination it
displays, and for the tumultuous vehemence of the action; and the one is
made the moving principle of the other. The overwhelming pressure of
preternatural agency urges on the tide of human passion with redoubled
force. Macbeth himself appears driven along by the violence of his fate
like a vessel drifting before a storm: he reels to and fro like a
drunken man; he staggers under the weight of his own purposes and the
suggestions of others; he stands at bay with his situation; and from the
superstitious awe and breathless suspense into which the communications
of the Weïrd Sisters throw him, is hurried on with daring impatience to
verify their predictions, and with impious and bloody hand to tear aside
the veil which hides the uncertainty of the future. He is not equal to
the struggle with fate and conscience. He now ‘bends up each corporal
instrument to the terrible feat’; at other times his heart misgives him,
and he is cowed and abashed by his success. ‘The deed, no less than the
attempt, confounds him.’ His mind is assailed by the stings of remorse,
and full of ‘preternatural solicitings.’ His speeches and soliloquies
are dark riddles on human life, baffling solution, and entangling him in
their labyrinths. In thought he is absent and perplexed, sudden and
desperate in act, from a distrust of his own resolution. His energy
springs from the anxiety and agitation of his mind. His blindly rushing
forward on the objects of his ambition and revenge, or his recoiling
from them, equally betrays the harassed state of his feelings.—This part
of his character is admirably set off by being brought in connection
with that of Lady Macbeth, whose obdurate strength of will and masculine
firmness give her the ascendancy over her husband’s faltering virtue.
She at once seizes on the opportunity that offers for the accomplishment
of all their wished-for greatness, and never flinches from her object
till all is over. The magnitude of her resolution almost covers the
magnitude of her guilt. She is a great bad woman, whom we hate, but whom
we fear more than we hate. She does not excite our loathing and
abhorrence like Regan and Gonerill. She is only wicked to gain a great
end; and is perhaps more distinguished by her commanding presence of
mind and inexorable self-will, which do not suffer her to be diverted
from a bad purpose, when once formed, by weak and womanly regrets, than
by the hardness of her heart or want of natural affections. The
impression which her lofty determination of character makes on the mind
of Macbeth is well described where he exclaims,

                        ——‘Bring forth men children only;
              For thy undaunted mettle should compose
              Nothing but males!’

Nor do the pains she is at to ‘screw his courage to the sticking-place,’
the reproach to him, not to be ‘lost so poorly in himself,’ the
assurance that ‘a little water clears them of this deed,’ show anything
but her greater consistency in depravity. Her strong-nerved ambition
furnishes ribs of steel to ‘the sides of his intent’; and she is herself
wound up to the execution of her baneful project with the same
unshrinking fortitude in crime, that in other circumstances she would
probably have shown patience in suffering. The deliberate sacrifice of
all other considerations to the gaining ‘for their future days and
nights sole sovereign sway and masterdom,’ by the murder of Duncan, is
gorgeously expressed in her invocation on hearing of ‘his fatal entrance
under her battlements’:—

                  ——‘Come all you spirits
          That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here:
          And fill me, from the crown to th’ toe, top-full
          Of direst cruelty; make thick my blood,
          Stop up the access and passage to remorse,
          That no compunctious visitings of nature
          Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
          The effect and it. Come to my woman’s breasts,
          And take my milk for gall, you murthering ministers,
          Wherever in your sightless substances
          You wait on nature’s mischief. Come, thick night!
          And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,
          That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
          Nor heav’n peep through the blanket of the dark,
          To cry, hold, hold!’——

When she first hears that ‘Duncan comes there to sleep’ she is so
overcome by the news, which is beyond her utmost expectations, that she
answers the messenger, ‘Thou’rt mad to say it’: and on receiving her
husband’s account of the predictions of the Witches, conscious of his
instability of purpose, and that her presence is necessary to goad him
on to the consummation of his promised greatness, she exclaims—

                        ——‘Hie thee hither,
              That I may pour my spirits in thine ear,
              And chastise with the valour of my tongue
              All that impedes thee from the golden round,
              Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
              To have thee crowned withal.’

This swelling exultation and keen spirit of triumph, this uncontroulable
eagerness of anticipation, which seems to dilate her form and take
possession of all her faculties, this solid, substantial flesh and blood
display of passion, exhibit a striking contrast to the cold, abstracted,
gratuitous, servile malignity of the Witches, who are equally
instrumental in urging Macbeth to his fate for the mere love of
mischief, and from a disinterested delight in deformity and cruelty.
They are hags of mischief, obscene panders to iniquity, malicious from
their impotence of enjoyment, enamoured of destruction, because they are
themselves unreal, abortive, half-existences—who become sublime from
their exemption from all human sympathies and contempt for all human
affairs, as Lady Macbeth does by the force of passion! Her fault seems
to have been an excess of that strong principle of self-interest and
family aggrandisement, not amenable to the common feelings of compassion
and justice, which is so marked a feature in barbarous nations and
times. A passing reflection of this kind, on the resemblance of the
sleeping king to her father, alone prevents her from slaying Duncan with
her own hand.

In speaking of the character of Lady Macbeth, we ought not to pass over
Mrs. Siddons’s manner of acting that part. We can conceive of nothing
grander. It was something above nature. It seemed almost as if a being
of a superior order had dropped from a higher sphere to awe the world
with the majesty of her appearance. Power was seated on her brow,
passion emanated from her breast as from a shrine; she was tragedy
personified. In coming on in the sleeping-scene, her eyes were open, but
their sense was shut. She was like a person bewildered and unconscious
of what she did. Her lips moved involuntarily—all her gestures were
involuntary and mechanical. She glided on and off the stage like an
apparition. To have seen her in that character was an event in every
one’s life, not to be forgotten.

The dramatic beauty of the character of Duncan, which excites the
respect and pity even of his murderers, has been often pointed out. It
forms a picture of itself. An instance of the author’s power of giving a
striking effect to a common reflection, by the manner of introducing it,
occurs in a speech of Duncan, complaining of his having been deceived in
his opinion of the Thane of Cawdor, at the very moment that he is
expressing the most unbounded confidence in the loyalty and services of
Macbeth.

   ‘There is no art
 To find the mind’s construction in the face:
 He was a gentleman, on whom I built
 An absolute trust.
 O worthiest cousin,                  (_addressing himself to Macbeth_.)
 The sin of my ingratitude e’en now
 Was great upon me,’ etc.

Another passage to show that Shakespear lost sight of nothing that could
in any way give relief or heightening to his subject, is the
conversation which takes place between Banquo and Fleance immediately
before the murder-scene of Duncan.

      ‘_Banquo._ How goes the night, boy?

      _Fleance._ The moon is down: I have not heard the clock.

      _Banquo._ And she goes down at twelve.

      _Fleance._ I take’t, ’tis later, Sir.

      _Banquo._ Hold, take my sword. There’s husbandry in heav’n,
      Their candles are all out.—
      A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
      And yet I would not sleep: Merciful Powers,
      Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
      Gives way to in repose.’

In like manner, a fine idea is given of the gloomy coming on of evening,
just as Banquo is going to be assassinated.

                  ‘Light thickens and the crow
                Makes wing to the rooky wood.’

                       .       .       .       .       .

                ‘Now spurs the lated traveller apace
                To gain the timely inn.’

MACBETH (generally speaking) is done upon a stronger and more systematic
principle of contrast than any other of Shakespear’s plays. It moves
upon the verge of an abyss, and is a constant struggle between life and
death. The action is desperate and the reaction is dreadful. It is a
huddling together of fierce extremes, a war of opposite natures which of
them shall destroy the other. There is nothing but what has a violent
end or violent beginnings. The lights and shades are laid on with a
determined hand; the transitions from triumph to despair, from the
height of terror to the repose of death, are sudden and startling; every
passion brings in its fellow-contrary, and the thoughts pitch and jostle
against each other as in the dark. The whole play is an unruly chaos of
strange and forbidden things, where the ground rocks under our feet.
Shakespear’s genius here took its full swing, and trod upon the farthest
bounds of nature and passion. This circumstance will account for the
abruptness and violent antitheses of the style, the throes and labour
which run through the expression, and from defects will turn them into
beauties. ‘So fair and foul a day I have not seen,’ etc. ‘Such welcome
and unwelcome news together.’ ‘Men’s lives are like the flowers in their
caps, dying or ere they sicken.’ ‘Look like the innocent flower, but be
the serpent under it.’ The scene before the castle-gate follows the
appearance of the Witches on the heath, and is followed by a midnight
murder. Duncan is cut off betimes by treason leagued with witchcraft,
and Macduff is ripped untimely from his mother’s womb to avenge his
death. Macbeth, after the death of Banquo, wishes for his presence in
extravagant terms, ‘To him and all we thirst,’ and when his ghost
appears, cries out, ‘Avaunt and quit my sight,’ and being gone, he is
‘himself again.’ Macbeth resolves to get rid of Macduff, that ‘he may
sleep in spite of thunder’; and cheers his wife on the doubtful
intelligence of Banquo’s taking-off with the encouragement—‘Then be thou
jocund: ere the bat has flown his cloistered flight; ere to black
Hecate’s summons the shard-born beetle has rung night’s yawning peal,
there shall be done—a deed of dreadful note.’ In Lady Macbeth’s speech
‘Had he not resembled my father as he slept, I had done’t,’ there is
murder and filial piety together; and in urging him to fulfil his
vengeance against the defenceless king, her thoughts spare the blood
neither of infants nor old age. The description of the Witches is full
of the same contradictory principle; they ‘rejoice when good kings
bleed,’ they are neither of the earth nor the air, but both; ‘they
should be women, but their beards forbid it’; they take all the pains
possible to lead Macbeth on to the height of his ambition, only to
betray him ‘in deeper consequence,’ and after showing him all the pomp
of their art, discover their malignant delight in his disappointed
hopes, by that bitter taunt, ‘Why stands Macbeth thus amazedly?’ We
might multiply such instances every where.

The leading features in the character of Macbeth are striking enough,
and they form what may be thought at first only a bold, rude, Gothic
outline. By comparing it with other characters of the same author we
shall perceive the absolute truth and identity which is observed in the
midst of the giddy whirl and rapid career of events. Macbeth in
Shakespear no more loses his identity of character in the fluctuations
of fortune or the storm of passion, than Macbeth in himself would have
lost the identity of his person. Thus he is as distinct a being from
Richard III. as it is possible to imagine, though these two characters
in common hands, and indeed in the hands of any other poet, would have
been a repetition of the same general idea, more or less exaggerated.
For both are tyrants, usurpers, murderers, both aspiring and ambitious,
both courageous, cruel, treacherous. But Richard is cruel from nature
and constitution. Macbeth becomes so from accidental circumstances.
Richard is from his birth deformed in body and mind, and naturally
incapable of good. Macbeth is full of ‘the milk of human kindness,’ is
frank, sociable, generous. He is tempted to the commission of guilt by
golden opportunities, by the instigations of his wife, and by prophetic
warnings. Fate and metaphysical aid conspire against his virtue and his
loyalty. Richard on the contrary needs no prompter, but wades through a
series of crimes to the height of his ambition from the ungovernable
violence of his temper and a reckless love of mischief. He is never gay
but in the prospect or in the success of his villainies: Macbeth is full
of horror at the thoughts of the murder of Duncan, which he is with
difficulty prevailed on to commit, and of remorse after its
perpetration. Richard has no mixture of common humanity in his
composition, no regard to kindred or posterity, he owns no fellowship
with others, he is ‘himself alone.’ Macbeth is not destitute of feelings
of sympathy, is accessible to pity, is even made in some measure the
dupe of his uxoriousness, ranks the loss of friends, of the cordial love
of his followers, and of his good name, among the causes which have made
him weary of life, and regrets that he has ever seized the crown by
unjust means, since he cannot transmit it to his posterity—

             ‘For Banquo’s issue have I fil’d my mind—
             For them the gracious Duncan have I murther’d,
             To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings.’

In the agitation of his mind, he envies those whom he has sent to peace.
‘Duncan is in his grave; after life’s fitful fever he sleeps well.’—It
is true, he becomes more callous as he plunges deeper in guilt,
‘direness is thus rendered familiar to his slaughterous thoughts,’ and
he in the end anticipates his wife in the boldness and bloodiness of his
enterprises, while she for want of the same stimulus of action, ‘is
troubled with thick-coming fancies that rob her of her rest,’ goes mad
and dies. Macbeth endeavours to escape from reflection on his crimes by
repelling their consequences, and banishes remorse for the past by the
meditation of future mischief. This is not the principle of Richard’s
cruelty, which displays the wanton malice of a fiend as much as the
frailty of human passion. Macbeth is goaded on to acts of violence and
retaliation by necessity; to Richard, blood is a pastime.—There are
other decisive differences inherent in the two characters. Richard may
be regarded as a man of the world, a plotting, hardened knave, wholly
regardless of every thing but his own ends, and the means to secure
them.—Not so Macbeth. The superstitions of the age, the rude state of
society, the local scenery and customs, all give a wildness and
imaginary grandeur to his character. From the strangeness of the events
that surround him, he is full of amazement and fear; and stands in doubt
between the world of reality and the world of fancy. He sees sights not
shown to mortal eye, and hears unearthly music. All is tumult and
disorder within and without his mind; his purposes recoil upon himself,
are broken and disjointed; he is the double thrall of his passions and
his evil destiny. Richard is not a character either of imagination or
pathos, but of pure self-will. There is no conflict of opposite feelings
in his breast. The apparitions which he sees only haunt him in his
sleep; nor does he live like Macbeth in a waking dream. Macbeth has
considerable energy and manliness of character; but then he is ‘subject
to all the skyey influences.’ He is sure of nothing but the present
moment. Richard in the busy turbulence of his projects never loses his
self-possession, and makes use of every circumstance that happens as an
instrument of his long-reaching designs. In his last extremity we can
only regard him as a wild beast taken in the toils: while we never
entirely lose our concern for Macbeth; and he calls back all our
sympathy by that fine close of thoughtful melancholy—

       ‘My way of life is fallen into the sear,
       The yellow leaf; and that which should accompany old age,
       As honour, troops of friends, I must not look to have;
       But in their stead, curses not loud but deep,
       Mouth-honour, breath, which the poor heart
       Would fain deny, and dare not.’

We can conceive a common actor to play Richard tolerably well; we can
conceive no one to play Macbeth properly, or to look like a man that had
encountered the Weïrd Sisters. All the actors that we have ever seen,
appear as if they had encountered them on the boards of Covent-garden or
Drury-lane, but not on the heath at Fores, and as if they did not
believe what they had seen. The Witches of MACBETH indeed are ridiculous
on the modern stage, and we doubt if the Furies of Æschylus would be
more respected. The progress of manners and knowledge has an influence
on the stage, and will in time perhaps destroy both tragedy and comedy.
Filch’s picking pockets in the _Beggar’s Opera_ is not so good a jest as
it used to be: by the force of the police and of philosophy, Lillo’s
murders and the ghosts in Shakespear will become obsolete. At last,
there will be nothing left, good nor bad, to be desired or dreaded, on
the theatre or in real life.—A question has been started with respect to
the originality of Shakespear’s Witches, which has been well answered by
Mr. Lamb in his notes to the ‘Specimens of Early Dramatic Poetry.’

  ‘Though some resemblance may be traced between the charms in
  MACBETH, and the incantations in this play (the Witch of Middleton),
  which is supposed to have preceded it, this coincidence will not
  detract much from the originality of Shakespear. His Witches are
  distinguished from the Witches of Middleton by essential
  differences. These are creatures to whom man or woman plotting some
  dire mischief might resort for occasional consultation. Those
  originate deeds of blood, and begin bad impulses to men. From the
  moment that their eyes first meet with Macbeth’s, he is spell-bound.
  That meeting sways his destiny. He can never break the fascination.
  These Witches can hurt the body; those have power over the
  soul.—Hecate in Middleton has a son, a low buffoon: the hags of
  Shakespear have neither child of their own, nor seem to be descended
  from any parent. They are foul anomalies, of whom we know not whence
  they are sprung, nor whether they have beginning or ending. As they
  are without human passions, so they seem to be without human
  relations. They come with thunder and lightning, and vanish to airy
  music. This is all we know of them.—Except Hecate, they have no
  names, which heightens their mysteriousness. The names, and some of
  the properties which Middleton has given to his hags, excite smiles.
  The Weïrd Sisters are serious things. Their presence cannot co-exist
  with mirth. But, in a lesser degree, the Witches of Middleton are
  fine creations. Their power too is, in some measure, over the mind.
  They raise jars, jealousies, strifes, _like a thick scurf o’er
  life_.’


                              JULIUS CÆSAR

JULIUS CÆSAR was one of three principal plays by different authors,
pitched upon by the celebrated Earl of Hallifax to be brought out in a
splendid manner by subscription, in the year 1707. The other two were
the _King and No King_ of Fletcher, and Dryden’s _Maiden Queen_. There
perhaps might be political reasons for this selection, as far as regards
our author. Otherwise, Shakespear’s JULIUS CÆSAR is not equal as a
whole, to either of his other plays taken from the Roman history. It is
inferior in interest to _Coriolanus_, and both in interest and power to
_Antony and Cleopatra_. It however abounds in admirable and affecting
passages, and is remarkable for the profound knowledge of character, in
which Shakespear could scarcely fail. If there is any exception to this
remark, it is in the hero of the piece himself. We do not much admire
the representation here given of Julius Cæsar, nor do we think it
answers to the portrait given of him in his Commentaries. He makes
several vapouring and rather pedantic speeches, and does nothing.
Indeed, he has nothing to do. So far, the fault of the character is the
fault of the plot.

The spirit with which the poet has entered at once into the manners of
the common people, and the jealousies and heart-burnings of the
different factions, is shown in the first scene, where Flavius and
Marullus, tribunes of the people, and some citizens of Rome, appear upon
the stage.

          ‘_Flavius._ Thou art a cobler, art thou?

          _Cobler._ Truly, Sir, _all_ that I live by, is the _awl_. I
          meddle with no tradesman’s matters, nor woman’s matters, but
          _with-al_, I am indeed, Sir, a surgeon to old shoes; when they
          are in great danger, I recover them.

          _Flavius._ But wherefore art not in thy shop to-day?
          Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?

          _Cobler._ Truly, Sir, to wear out their shoes, to get myself
          into more work. But indeed, Sir, we make holiday to see Cæsar,
          and rejoice in his triumph.’

To this specimen of quaint low humour immediately follows that
unexpected and animated burst of indignant eloquence, put into the mouth
of one of the angry tribunes.

     ‘_Marullus._ Wherefore rejoice!—What conquest brings he home?
     What tributaries follow him to Rome,
     To grace in captive-bonds his chariot-wheels?
     Oh you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome!
     Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
     Have you climb’d up to walls and battlements,
     To towers and windows, yea, to chimney-tops,
     Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
     The live-long day with patient expectation,
     To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome:
     And when you saw his chariot but appear,
     Have you not made an universal shout,
     That Tyber trembled underneath his banks
     To hear the replication of your sounds,
     Made in his concave shores?
     And do you now put on your best attire?
     And do you now cull out an holiday?
     And do you now strew flowers in his way
     That comes in triumph over Pompey’s blood?
     Begone——
     Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
     Pray to the Gods to intermit the plague,
     That needs must light on this ingratitude.’

The well-known dialogue between Brutus and Cassius, in which the latter
breaks the design of the conspiracy to the former, and partly gains him
over to it, is a noble piece of high-minded declamation. Cassius’s
insisting on the pretended effeminacy of Cæsar’s character, and his
description of their swimming across the Tiber together, ‘once upon a
raw and gusty day,’ are among the finest strokes in it. But perhaps the
whole is not equal to the short scene which follows, when Cæsar enters
with his train:—

         ‘_Brutus._ The games are done, and Cæsar is returning.

         _Cassius._ As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
         And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
         What has proceeded worthy note to day.

         _Brutus._ I will do so; but look you, Cassius—
         The angry spot doth glow on Cæsar’s brow,
         And all the rest look like a chidden train.
         Calphurnia’s cheek is pale; and Cicero
         Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes,
         As we have seen him in the Capitol,
         Being crost in conference by some senators.

         _Cassius._ Casca will tell us what the matter is.

         _Cæsar._ Antonius——

         _Antony._ Cæsar?

         _Cæsar._ Let me have men about me that are fat,
         Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep a-nights:
         Yon Cassius has a lean and hungry look,
         He thinks too much; such men are dangerous.

         _Antony._ Fear him not, Cæsar, he’s not dangerous:
         He is a noble Roman, and well given.

         _Cæsar._ Would he were fatter; but I fear him not:
         Yet if my name were liable to fear,
         I do not know the man I should avoid
         So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much;
         He is a great observer; and he looks
         Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays,
         As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music:
         Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort,
         As if he mock’d himself, and scorn’d his spirit,
         That could be mov’d to smile at any thing.
         Such men as he be never at heart’s ease,
         Whilst they behold a greater than themselves;
         And therefore are they very dangerous.
         I rather tell thee what is to be fear’d
         Than what I fear; for always I am Cæsar.
         Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
         And tell me truly what thou think’st of him.’

We know hardly any passage more expressive of the genius of Shakespear
than this. It is as if he had been actually present, had known the
different characters and what they thought of one another, and had taken
down what he heard and saw, their looks, words, and gestures, just as
they happened.

The character of Mark Antony is farther speculated upon where the
conspirators deliberate whether he shall fall with Cæsar. Brutus is
against it—

         ‘And for Mark Antony, think not of him:
         For he can do no more than Cæsar’s arm,
         When Cæsar’s head is off.

         _Cassius._ Yet I do fear him:
         For in th’ ingrafted love he bears to Cæsar——

         _Brutus._ Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him:
         If he love Cæsar, all that he can do
         Is to himself, take thought, and die for Cæsar:
         And that were much, he should; for he is giv’n
         To sports, to wildness, and much company.

         _Trebonius._ There is no fear in him; let him not die:
         For he will live, and laugh at this hereafter.’

They were in the wrong; and Cassius was right.

The honest manliness of Brutus is however sufficient to find out the
unfitness of Cicero to be included in their enterprise, from his
affected egotism and literary vanity.

              ‘O, name him not: let us not break with him;
              For he will never follow anything,
              That other men begin.’

His scepticism as to prodigies and his moralising on the weather—‘This
disturbed sky is not to walk in’—are in the same spirit of refined
imbecility.

Shakespear has in this play and elsewhere shown the same penetration
into political character and the springs of public events as into those
of every-day life. For instance, the whole design of the conspirators to
liberate their country fails from the generous temper and overweening
confidence of Brutus in the goodness of their cause and the assistance
of others. Thus it has always been. Those who mean well themselves think
well of others, and fall a prey to their security. That humanity and
honesty which dispose men to resist injustice and tyranny render them
unfit to cope with the cunning and power of those who are opposed to
them. The friends of liberty trust to the professions of others, because
they are themselves sincere, and endeavour to reconcile the public good
with the least possible hurt to its enemies, who have no regard to any
thing but their own unprincipled ends, and stick at nothing to
accomplish them. Cassius was better cut out for a conspirator. His heart
prompted his head. His watchful jealousy made him fear the worst that
might happen, and his irritability of temper added to his inveteracy of
purpose, and sharpened his patriotism. The mixed nature of his motives
made him fitter to contend with bad men. The vices are never so well
employed as in combating one another. Tyranny and servility are to be
dealt with after their own fashion: otherwise, they will triumph over
those who spare them, and finally pronounce their funeral panegyric, as
Antony did that of Brutus.

               ‘All the conspirators, save only he,
               Did that they did in envy of great Cæsar:
               He only in a general honest thought
               And common good to all, made one of them.’

The quarrel between Brutus and Cassius is managed in a masterly way. The
dramatic fluctuation of passion, the calmness of Brutus, the heat of
Cassius, are admirably described; and the exclamation of Cassius on
hearing of the death of Portia, which he does not learn till after their
reconciliation, ‘How ‘scaped I killing when I crost you so?’ gives
double force to all that has gone before. The scene between Brutus and
Portia, where she endeavours to extort the secret of the conspiracy from
him, is conceived in the most heroical spirit, and the burst of
tenderness in Brutus—

                 ‘You are my true and honourable wife;
                 As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
                 That visit my sad heart’—

is justified by her whole behaviour. Portia’s breathless impatience to
learn the event of the conspiracy, in the dialogue with Lucius, is full
of passion. The interest which Portia takes in Brutus and that which
Calphurnia takes in the fate of Cæsar are discriminated with the nicest
precision. Mark Antony’s speech over the dead body of Cæsar has been
justly admired for the mixture of pathos and artifice in it: that of
Brutus certainly is not so good.

The entrance of the conspirators to the house of Brutus at midnight is
rendered very impressive. In the midst of this scene, we meet with one
of those careless and natural digressions which occur so frequently and
beautifully in Shakespear. After Cassius has introduced his friends one
by one, Brutus says—

    ‘They are all welcome.
  What watchful cares do interpose themselves
  Betwixt your eyes and night?

  _Cassius._ Shall I entreat a word?                 (_They whisper._)

  _Decius._ Here lies the east: doth not the day break here?

  _Casca._ No.

  _Cinna._ O pardon, Sir, it doth; and yon grey lines,
  That fret the clouds, are messengers of day.

  _Casca._ You shall confess, that you are both deceiv’d:
  Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises,
  Which is a great way growing on the south,
  Weighing the youthful season of the year.
  Some two months hence, up higher toward the north
  He first presents his fire, and the high east
  Stands as the Capitol, directly here.’

We cannot help thinking this graceful familiarity better than all the
fustian in the world.—The truth of history in JULIUS CÆSAR is very ably
worked up with dramatic effect. The councils of generals, the doubtful
turns of battles, are represented to the life. The death of Brutus is
worthy of him—it has the dignity of the Roman senator with the firmness
of the Stoic philosopher. But what is perhaps better than either, is the
little incident of his boy, Lucius, falling asleep over his instrument,
as he is playing to his master in his tent, the night before the battle.
Nature had played him the same forgetful trick once before on the night
of the conspiracy. The humanity of Brutus is the same on both occasions.

                            ——‘It is no matter:
              Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber.
              Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies,
              Which busy care draws in the brains of men.
              Therefore thou sleep’st so sound.’


                                OTHELLO

It has been said that tragedy purifies the affections by terror and
pity. That is, it substitutes imaginary sympathy for mere selfishness.
It gives us a high and permanent interest, beyond ourselves, in humanity
as such. It raises the great, the remote, and the possible to an
equality with the real, the little and the near. It makes man a partaker
with his kind. It subdues and softens the stubbornness of his will. It
teaches him that there are and have been others like himself, by showing
him as in a glass what they have felt, thought, and done. It opens the
chambers of the human heart. It leaves nothing indifferent to us that
can affect our common nature. It excites our sensibility by exhibiting
the passions wound up to the utmost pitch by the power of imagination or
the temptation of circumstances; and corrects their fatal excesses in
ourselves by pointing to the greater extent of sufferings and of crimes
to which they have led others. Tragedy creates a balance of the
affections. It makes us thoughtful spectators in the lists of life. It
is the refiner of the species; a discipline of humanity. The habitual
study of poetry and works of imagination is one chief part of a
well-grounded education. A taste for liberal art is necessary to
complete the character of a gentleman. Science alone is hard and
mechanical. It exercises the understanding upon things out of ourselves,
while it leaves the affections unemployed, or engrossed with our own
immediate, narrow interests.—OTHELLO furnishes an illustration of these
remarks. It excites our sympathy in an extraordinary degree. The moral
it conveys has a closer application to the concerns of human life than
that of almost any other of Shakespear’s plays. ‘It comes directly home
to the bosoms and business of men.’ The pathos in _Lear_ is indeed more
dreadful and overpowering: but it is less natural, and less of every
day’s occurrence. We have not the same degree of sympathy with the
passions described in _Macbeth_. The interest in _Hamlet_ is more remote
and reflex. That of OTHELLO is at once equally profound and affecting.

The picturesque contrasts of character in this play are almost as
remarkable as the depth of the passion. The Moor Othello, the gentle
Desdemona, the villain Iago, the good-natured Cassio, the fool Roderigo,
present a range and variety of character as striking and palpable as
that produced by the opposition of costume in a picture. Their
distinguishing qualities stand out to the mind’s eye, so that even when
we are not thinking of their actions or sentiments, the idea of their
persons is still as present to us as ever. These characters and the
images they stamp upon the mind are the farthest asunder possible, the
distance between them is immense: yet the compass of knowledge and
invention which the poet has shown in embodying these extreme creations
of his genius is only greater than the truth and felicity with which he
has identified each character with itself, or blended their different
qualities together in the same story. What a contrast the character of
Othello forms to that of Iago! At the same time, the force of conception
with which these two figures are opposed to each other is rendered still
more intense by the complete consistency with which the traits of each
character are brought out in a state of the highest finishing. The
making one black and the other white, the one unprincipled, the other
unfortunate in the extreme, would have answered the common purposes of
effect, and satisfied the ambition of an ordinary painter of character.
Shakespear has laboured the finer shades of difference in both with as
much care and skill as if he had had to depend on the execution alone
for the success of his design. On the other hand, Desdemona and Æmilia
are not meant to be opposed with anything like strong contrast to each
other. Both are, to outward appearance, characters of common life, not
more distinguished than women usually are, by difference of rank and
situation. The difference of their thoughts and sentiments is however
laid open, their minds are separated from each other by signs as plain
and as little to be mistaken as the complexions of their husbands.

The movement of the passion in Othello is exceedingly different from
that of Macbeth. In Macbeth there is a violent struggle between opposite
feelings, between ambition and the stings of conscience, almost from
first to last: in Othello, the doubtful conflict between contrary
passions, though dreadful, continues only for a short time, and the
chief interest is excited by the alternate ascendancy of different
passions, by the entire and unforeseen change from the fondest love and
most unbounded confidence to the tortures of jealousy and the madness of
hatred. The revenge of Othello, after it has once taken thorough
possession of his mind, never quits it, but grows stronger and stronger
at every moment of its delay. The nature of the Moor is noble,
confiding, tender, and generous; but his blood is of the most
inflammable kind; and being once roused by a sense of his wrongs, he is
stopped by no considerations of remorse or pity till he has given a
loose to all the dictates of his rage and his despair. It is in working
his noble nature up to this extremity through rapid but gradual
transitions, in raising passion to its height from the smallest
beginnings and in spite of all obstacles, in painting the expiring
conflict between love and hatred, tenderness and resentment, jealousy
and remorse, in unfolding the strength and the weakness of our nature,
in uniting sublimity of thought with the anguish of the keenest woe, in
putting in motion the various impulses that agitate this our mortal
being, and at last blending them in that noble tide of deep and
sustained passion, impetuous but majestic, that ‘flows on to the
Propontic, and knows no ebb,’ that Shakespear has shown the mastery of
his genius and of his power over the human heart. The third act of
OTHELLO is his finest display, not of knowledge or passion separately,
but of the two combined, of the knowledge of character with the
expression of passion, of consummate art in the keeping up of
appearances with the profound workings of nature, and the convulsive
movements of uncontroulable agony, of the power of inflicting torture
and of suffering it. Not only is the tumult of passion in Othello’s mind
heaved up from the very bottom of the soul, but every the slightest
undulation of feeling is seen on the surface, as it arises from the
impulses of imagination or the malicious suggestions of Iago. The
progressive preparation for the catastrophe is wonderfully managed from
the Moor’s first gallant recital of the story of his love, of ‘the
spells and witchcraft he had used,’ from his unlooked-for and romantic
success, the fond satisfaction with which he dotes on his own happiness,
the unreserved tenderness of Desdemona and her innocent importunities in
favour of Cassio, irritating the suspicions instilled into her husband’s
mind by the perfidy of Iago, and rankling there to poison, till he loses
all command of himself, and his rage can only be appeased by blood. She
is introduced, just before Iago begins to put his scheme in practice,
pleading for Cassio with all the thoughtless gaiety of friendship and
winning confidence in the love of Othello.

         ‘What! Michael Cassio?
         That came a wooing with you, and so many a time,
         When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
         Hath ta’en your part, to have so much to do
         To bring him in?—Why this is not a boon:
         ’Tis as I should intreat you wear your gloves,
         Or feed on nourishing meats, or keep you warm;
         Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit
         To your person. Nay, when I have a suit,
         Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
         It shall be full of poise, and fearful to be granted.’

Othello’s confidence, at first only staggered by broken hints and
insinuations, recovers itself at sight of Desdemona; and he exclaims

             ‘If she be false, O then Heav’n mocks itself:
             I’ll not believe it.’

But presently after, on brooding over his suspicions by himself, and
yielding to his apprehensions of the worst, his smothered jealousy
breaks out into open fury, and he returns to demand satisfaction of Iago
like a wild beast stung with the envenomed shaft of the hunters. ‘Look
where he comes,’ etc. In this state of exasperation and violence, after
the first paroxysms of his grief and tenderness have had their vent in
that passionate apostrophe, ‘I felt not Cassio’s kisses on her lips,’
Iago, by false aspersions, and by presenting the most revolting images
to his mind,[65] easily turns the storm of passion from himself against
Desdemona, and works him up into a trembling agony of doubt and fear, in
which he abandons all his love and
The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Damokosok, by Mór Jókai

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: A Damokosok

Author: Mór Jókai

Release Date: November 11, 2017 [EBook #55934]

Language: Hungarian

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAMOKOSOK ***




Produced by Albert László from page images generously made
available by the Google Books Library Project






JÓKAI MÓR

ÖSSZES MŰVEI

NEMZETI KIADÁS

LVI. KÖTET

A DAMOKOSOK

BUDAPEST

RÉVAI TESTVÉREK KIADÁSA

1896

A DAMOKOSOK

REGÉNYES TÖRTÉNET

IRTA

JÓKAI MÓR

BUDAPEST

RÉVAI TESTVÉREK TULAJDONA

1896




A CSERNÁTONI EZERMESTER.

Lám megmondta jó előre Küprili nagyvezér Rákóczy György
nagyfejedelemnek: «ne menj te Lengyelországba, királyságot keresni; mert
bizony úgy jársz, mint a teve: a ki odament Allah elé, azt követelve,
hogy adjon neki szarvakat, s aztán Allah még a füleit is levágta neki».
– Egészen úgy járt György fejedelem is. Nem érte be azzal, hogy a
gyönyörű szép Erdélyország nagyfejedelme lehetett, egyformán becsülve
némettől, ozmántól: a bűne, a nagyravágyása átvitte Lengyelországba
koronát keresni; ott azután nemcsak, hogy a korona aranyszarvait nem
kapta meg, de odaveszítette nemzete virágát, Erdély harczoló seregét is.
Azokat elfogta a krimiai tatárok khánja, a kit a szultán küldött az
erdélyi hadak hátába.

A székely csapatok vezére Nyújtódi Damokos Tamás, a mint azt látta, hogy
a fejedelem aláirta a legcsúfosabb békekötés feltételeit, maga pedig
mellékutakon elmenekült Magyarországba; a fővezér Kemény János ellenben
odaalázta meg magát, hogy személyesen átmenjen a tatár khán táborába,
kiéhezett, agyonfáradt hadai számára irgalmat-kegyelmet könyörögni: azt
mondá a hadnagyának, Czirjék Boldizsárnak: «édes játom, nekünk már itt
lőttek!»

– Nem csak lőttek, de harangoztak is.

– Kitalálod-e már, hogy mit tesz az a találós mese: «ettünk
sültet-főttet, föld alatt, fa tetejébe’ – mi az?»

– Ki bizony. A tatárfutásról hagyták ránk ezt a szomorú tréfát az
őseink.

– Meg vagyunk mink már fogva csűstül.

– Én még tudnám, hogy merre kén’ kibujnunk?

– Én pedig azt nem tanulom meg. A fejedelem ám elfuthatott: neki
kötelessége a személyét megmenteni; te csak hadnagy vagy, neked sem
szégyen a sarkaddal fenyegetni az ellenséget; de én a lófők vezére
vagyok; nekem nem szabad a hátamat mutogatnom: nekem itt kell maradnom
az én népemmel harczban, rabságban egyaránt.

– Akkor bizony én is itt maradok veled.

– De nem maradsz! Épen az, hogy el kell menned; haza kell találnod; az
én szerelmes asszonyomnak várába el kell jutnod; felőlem neki hirt
mondanod.

– Hát az igen könnyen fog menni.

– Nem olyan nagyon könnyen, mint gondolnád. Mert nem mehetsz ám könnyű
szerrel. Mivelhogy ezt a turbát is magaddal kell vinned.

Az a «turba» a régi háborús világban valami emberhátra felköthető
vasládikó volt, kívül csikóbőrrel bevonva, s vasruddal lakatra bezárva.
(Innen maradt fel a közmondás: «ellopták a turbát, de nálam a kulcsa!»)

– S van benne valami?

– Van bizony. Tele van pénzzel. Fele arany, fele ezüst. Nem tudom a
számát. De annyi sulyt vet, mint egy kis borju. Ezzel több terhe lesz a
lovadnak, vagy pedig a hátadnak, ha gyalog maradsz. Már pedig a bundádat
sem hagyhatod el, mert tél van, a puskádat is vinned kell; meg a
pallosodat, aztán meg a fejszédet is; de meg egy egész kenyeret is kell
czepelned az útra, meg egy darab szalonnát, hogy éhen ne halj.

– Mind akad annak gazdája.

– Mert látod, ha ez a pénz most itt marad nálam: a mint a pogány tatár
bennünket rabságra ejt, az azt rögtön prédára ejti, csak egy rézgombot
is az mi rajtunk nem hagy. Ha pedig ezt a pénzt az én drágámnak, jó
feleségemnek haza viheted, hát ez jó lesz neki arra, hogy a váltságdíjat
lerója belőle, a mit a gonosz tatár fejemre fog róni, a kiről tudja,
hogy vezér vagyok: még majd elég sem lesz reá.

– De akkor hát elviszem magammal.

– De ugyan vigyázz ám magadra, hogy meg ne fogdosson a tatár.

– Ne te né! Hát azért volna nekem ezermester a nevem, hogy még az ilyen
rusnya tatáron se tudjak kifogni?

Czirjék Boldizsár bá pedig nem hiába volt büszke az ezermesteri nevére;
mert valósággal az volt ő.

Csinált ő egyszer olyan szövőszéket, a mit a patak hajt s magától
megszövi az abaposztót. Azután meg egy olyan gyalogszekeret készített, a
mi ló nélkül jár: az ember maga benne ül s kézzel-lábbal hajtja; az
igaz, hogy jobban elfárad vele, mint ha gyalog járna, de legalább kocsin
utazik. Megjárta ő ezen Nagy-Enyedet is, egész vásár csodájára. – Olyan
fegyvert is fundált ki, a mivel a medve saját magát lövi agyon: még
pedig puskapor nélkül.

Nem kell Czirjék Bildizsár bát félteni. Van annak annyi tudománya, hogy
százezer tatár nem jár túl rajta.

Mielőtt a futáshoz kezdett volna, hát legelébb is azt tette, hogy egy
bádog szelenczéből, a mit magával hordott erre az alkalomra, bekente a
saruja szárait jó erősen farkashájjal. Ettől aztán a saját lova olyan
szaladós lett, mintha farkasokat érezne a hátában, míg ellenkezőleg a
tatárok, a kik rögtön üldözőbe vették, a mint látták, hogy szökni indul,
el nem tudták gondolni, mi lelte a lovaikat? a mint azok közelbe érték
Czirjéket, mind visszafordultak, rugtak, kapálóztak, lehányták a
hátukról a gazdáikat, semmiképen nem akartak neki menni a megérzett
farkas szimatnak.

Boldizsár bá csak úgy nevette őket, hátra-hátra fordítva a képét.

A tatárok azonban, ha lovaikkal be nem érhették a futót, a nyilaikkal
ugyan megtalálhaták.

Czirjék Boldizsár csak egyre hallá, hogy ott sivít el a füle mellett
egy-egy vasorrú madár, a kinek hátul a tolla.

«Ez így nem jó lesz: vagy emberben, vagy állatban kár esik, s az hiba
lesz.» Mondá magában a hadnagy, s ez ellen meg azt a fortélyt gondolta
ki, hogy a mint egy patakhoz ért, ott leszállt, a bundáját belemerítette
a vízbe, s aztán a gyapjas részével kifelé fordítva, úgy veté a nyakába,
hogy ez nemcsak őt magát, hanem a lova hátulját is egészen takarta. Az a
vízbemártott bunda pedig a csikorgó hidegben egyszerre jéggé fagyott:
olyan lett az, mintha vaspánczél lett volna. A bolond tatár egyre
nyilazott rá, de a nyílvessző mind lepattogott a természetadta birkabőr
pajzsról: a jégen keresztül nem volt kedve a nyíl hegyének hatolni.
Megint csak ő nevetett.

A tatárok azonban nem maradtak el a sarkából. Egész csapat fogta
üldözőbe, fertelmes kurjongatással. Meglátták a hátán a turbát, s azt
már tudja a tatár, sok százados gyakorlatból, hogy abban a magyarok
pénzüket tartják. Ez drága madár! Érdemes utána nyargalni.

Czirjék Boldizsár bá tudta azt jól, hogy ez az ő két stratagémája csak
addig használ, a míg a futása a hegyi szűk utakon, keskeny völgyekben
tart, a hol nem kerülhetnek eléje, de a mint valami lapályra fog jutni,
a hol a tatárok eléje kerülhetnek, ott már szél ellenében nem fognak
ijedezni a lovaik a farkasháj szagától, az ő lova pedig a súlyosabb
teher alatt hamarább kifárad, nem győzi az erőltetett versenyt, hát
valami mást kell kigondolni.

Egyszerre egy sűrű erdőbe érve, hirtelen utat vesztett, félrecsapott,
mikor az üldözői nem látták, s elhagyva a mély ösvényt, leereszkedék az
erdős hegyoldalon a mély völgybe.

Ámde a tatárok minden gonosz politikával el voltak készülve. Csunya,
kitanított vérebeket hordtak magukkal, a mik az üldözött áldozatot, ha
az el talált rejtőzni valami bozótban, menten felvadászták. Czirjék
Boldizsár bá, mikor már egyszer egy csorgó mellett pihenőt tartana, s
szalonnázni kezdene, csak hallja ám, hogy csaholnak az erdőben a czudar
sinkoránok.

– Ne te né! Még bizony csuffá tennének, ha hagynám magamat. Hogy ugatnak
a kedveskék! Nem hiába kutyafejű tatár az ő nevük.

Hanem hát egy ezermestert nem olyan könnyü elfogni.

Boldizsár bá, megismerve az új veszedelmet, maga is fordított a
stratagémán. Leszedte a lováról a mindenféle czókmókot, belekötött
mindent a bundájába egy nagy batyunak. Azt a saját hátára vetette.

– No most már édes lovam, eredj a magad esze után a merre látsz! Mondá,
nagyot ütve a tenyerével a lova hátára. Az sem volt rest; a mint a
kötőféket kiakasztották a nyakából, neki fordult az erdőnek s teher
nélkül úgy elszaladt, mint egy gímszarvas. A tatárok vérebei aztán mind
a futó paripa szimatján csaholtak tovább. Boldizsár bá farkashájas
saruinak a nyomát semmi kedvük sem volt tovább üldözni. A farkast nem
hajtja a kutya: már nem tudom, nemzetiségi rokonszenvből-e, vagy
testvérgyülöletből; de kikerüli, ha lehet.

Így aztán Boldizsár bá csak nyert egy kis egérútat, s azt arra használta
fel, hogy a szálerdővel fedett hegyoldalban mind lejebb ereszkedék a
völgybe, gondolva, hogy talál majd ott egy mély hegyszakadékot, a min ha
keresztülhatolhat, a lovas tatár nem kerülhet elé. A tulsó oldalon aztán
kap egy új mokánylovat, vagy jó pénzért, vagy egy jó fejbecsapásért.

Talált ám, de nem egy hegyszakadékot, hanem egy tengerszemet a völgy
mélyében: az a völgy is olyan gömbölyű volt, mint egy döbör, köröskörül
bekerítve erdős hegyoldalakkal; nem volt abból semerre kimenekülés.

A tatárok pedig már észrevették, hogy üres paripa után szaladnak, a
lovag elbujt; nagy hamar visszatértek: baromsok nép volt, elállták az
egész erdőt, csak úgy viszhangzott a szálfás rengeteg a kiáltozásaiktól:
«marrha! marrha!» a mi az ő szokott csatakiáltásuk.

– Marha ám az öreg apád! Mondá Boldizsár bá s szétnézett a terepen: mit
lehetne csinálni?

A tengerszem be volt fagyva.

Hanem az ilyen tengerszemnek a mély vize mindig meleg, úgy, hogy vastag
jégkéreg nem támadhat rajta. Boldidizsár bá megpróbálta a balta fokával.
A bizony beszakadt egy ütésre: – a jég kenyérre kenni való sajtnak elég
vastag lett volna, hanem pallónak meg dobogó hidnak nagyon vékony volt.

– No csak, ne ijedj meg magyar, biztatá magát az ezermester: Így van ez
jól.

Azzal szétnézett a parton. – Hevert ott rakás számra a sok fiatal fenyő,
a mit a szél kitördelt. Boldizsár bá hozzáfogott a baltájával, négy szál
ilyen vékony dorongnak való fenyőből egy pár korcsolyát a maga két
lábának, meg egy szánkót a batyunak összeeszkábálni.

Nem történhetett ez meg nesz nélkül. A sok baltaütés egészen elárulta az
üldözők előtt, hogy hol bujkál, a kit keresnek. Minden oldalról
csörtettek arrafelé.

– No csak ne törjétek magatokat olyan nagyon! Dörmögé Boldizsár bá. Még
megizzadtok s száraz kehet kaptok bele.

Azok pedig csak jöttek közelebb, s folyvást szorosabbra húzták a kört a
menekülő körül; már nagyon lehetett hallani a lovaik robaját a recsegő
targalyak közt. Most mindjárt a nyakán lesznek.

– Hát hiszen én is mindjárt készen leszek!

Mikor a legelső lovasok egy-két nyillövésnyi távolban kibukkantak a fák
közül, már akkor Boldizsár bának a lábaira volt kötözve a két ölnyi
hosszú fenyőfa-korcsolya, még csak a szánkót rakta meg. A bunda az itt
maradhat, a nélkül is elég melege van az embernek, a mikor kergetik;
kenyér, szalonna se szaporítsa a terhet: «most laktunk jól, holnapra is
majd ád az Isten valamit! ha nem ád, megalkuszunk a gyomrunkkal!» – Nem
tett a szánkóra egyebet, mint a turbát, meg a fegyvereit: a szánt
odakötötte az ővéhez, s aztán még egy hosszú, hegyes végű rudat fogott a
kezébe s azzal neki iszánkodott a vékony jegű tónak.

Egészen helyes volt a mathematikája. A vékony jégkéreg a hosszu
fakorcsolyák alatt megbírta a gyorsan keresztül iramló embernyi terhet
is és sehol nem szakadt be alatta: úgy repült át a tavon, szánkójával
együtt, mint a vízi pók; még csak meg sem recscsent alatta a jéghid.

«Marrha! Marrha!» ordítá az üldöző had, a mint meglátta a jég hátán a
menekülőt, s aztán azt gondolták, hogy az a tó «fenékig tejfel», utána
rugtattak, a mivel azt nyerték, hogy valami huszan-harminczan a
bolondabbak közül beleszakadtak a jégbe: egynehányan azt is
megpróbálták, hogy úsztatva áttörtessenek a tulsó partig, de pórul
jártak vele, mert a vékony jég mind összevagdalta a lovak szügyét, hogy
nem birtak előrehatolni. Boldizsár bá de hátra sem pillantott addig, a
míg a tulsó oldalon szárazra nem jutott: csak akkor nézett aztán vissza,
nagy lelki nyugalommal látva, hogy milyen jól helybenhagyta gonosz
üldözőit. Azok még akkor is vergődtek a jeges vízben, egynéhány hegyes
kucsma ott úszott már gazdátlanul; a parton állók pedig nagy csoportban
káromkodtak, a mit Boldizsár bá nem hagyott viszonzatlanul. Jó
szerencse, hogy egymás nyelvét nem értették; mert különben még
összevesztek volna. A tatárok mérgükben egész raj számra repíték a
nyilakat Boldizsár bá felé, de az egy sem jutott el hozzáig: széles volt
az a tó!

– Ejnye, nem szégyelitek magatokat? No megálljatok, majd én is küldök
nektek valamit.

Azzal lefektette a puskáját a favillára s odaczélzott, a hol legsürübben
álltak a tatárok. Azok látták, hogy micsoda rossz szándéka van; de csak
csúfságot csináltak belőle. Tudták ők «már», hogy a tüzetadó likas vas
messze elhord; csakhogy annak az elsütéséhez tüzes kanócz kell, az pedig
az üldözött kezében nincs; – azt pedig «még» nem tudták, hogy kanócz
nélkül is el lehet sütni a puskát, ha annak závárába tűzkövet tesznek; s
ezt már a csernátoni ezermester régen kifundálta, mielőtt a hollandiak
rájöttek volna. – Egyszer aztán csak nagyot durran a fegyver: olyan volt
annak a viszhangja a mély völgyben, mint a mennydörgős ménkü csapása, s
a bennelevő három golyóbis ki is likasztotta épen egy murzának az
oldalát úgy, hogy az menten testamentumot tett: a többiek aztán eszük
nélkül tánczoltak vissza az erdőbe.

– Tanulják meg, hogy kivel van dolguk!

Boldizsár bá hasra feküdt a mohos parton s úgy pihente ki magát,
csendesen elnézve, hogy mit fundálnak már most a tatárok. Azt kivehette,
hogy azok most abban törik a fejüket, hogy megkerüljék a tavat.

– Ilyen a buta ember, a ki nem járt a fehérvári collégiumba; nem tanulta
a geometriát! Azt gondolják, hogy ők engem megkeríthetnek: holott nekem
oda fel a hegytetőig csak egy fél-diametert kell átballagnom; nekik
pedig egy fél circulust. A ki nem ért a mathesishez!

A tatárok azonban, úgy látszik, hogy más collegiumban járták ki a primi
anni philosophiát, mert egész bizonyosra indultak neki a két oldalon
való körülkerítésnek.

Boldizsár bá pedig, hogy annál jobban boszantsa őket, még magasra
feltartá előttük a turbát s megrázta, hogy hallják, hogy csörög benne a
pénz. Azok vonítottak, mint a farkasok a malaczpecsenyére!

Az ezermester minden megerőltetés nélkül haladt egyenesen felfelé a
tulsó hegyoldalon; még nem is igen sietett. Hanem aztán mikor felért a
hegytetőre, akkor látta hüledezve, hogy micsoda átkozott helyre jutott.
A tulsó oldala ennek a hegynek egy meredek sziklafal; alant rettenetes
mélység, teledöntögetve óriási kőcsompókkal: úgy néz ki a vidék, mintha
itt bújt volna be az ördög a pokolba, s aztán úgy össze-vissza hányta
volna a bejáratot, hogy utána ne találjanak. Semmiféle ösvény e lakatlan
szakadékba sehonnan nem vezet.

– No Boldizsár komám, innen szabadulj ki mostan, ha ezermester vagy!

Erre számitottak bizonyosan a tatárok, a kiknek oláh vezetőik voltak:
azok árulták el előttük, hogy a merre az üldözött menekült, arrafelé
nincs a világnak kapuja: az a Csetátye Drakuluj.




A CSETÁTYE DRAKULUJ.

Jaj bizony, itt most egy kicsinyt repülni kell: a szabadulás nem
történik meg e nélkül, édes atyámfia! mondogatá magának Boldizsár bá.
Pedig még akkor nem is született Mongolfier, hogy az égből leszállás
mesterségét megtanítsa.

Szétnézett valami segítség után. Megtalálta. Egy szép, nagy, sudár,
fiatal jegenyefenyő volt a kezeügyében, a minek a lombos ágai gyászfűz
módjára lefelé csüggnek; azt kivágta a fejszéjével. Alul a vastag végére
rákötözte egy sing magasságra a turbát, arra állítá a puskát, jól
kiszámítva (Newton nélkül), hogy a mi nehezebb, az megy lefelé estében
előre; még felső ruháit is levetette, azokat is a körül csavargatta.
Akkor aztán kikeresett egy pontot a hegyszakadék ormózatán, a hol a
meredek szikla nemcsak függélyesen áll a mélység felett, de még egy
cseppet előre is hajlik: oda czepelte a levágott fenyősudarat.

Mikor aztán a tatárok jöttek minden oldalról az erdőből nagy
rivalkodással feléje, hogy már most megfogják, akkor Boldizsár bá ráült
a levágott fára, mint a szánkóra, s aztán elkezdte azt a két sarkával
előre csusztatni a sziklapárkány felé, felsóhajtva az egekre: «no, most
pislants uram Jézus!» Egyszer aztán lebillent a fenyőfa a párkányról s
alázuhant emberestül, mindenestül a mélységbe.

A tatárok elszörnyedve csapták össze az első lábaikat erre a látványra:
«ni, a bolond magyar, inkább elöli magát, mint hogy elfogják!»

Dehogy is öli el! Ördöge van annak! Az alázuhanó fa röptében olyan
egyenesre állt, hogy a hegyes sudara fölfelé meredt s a vastag vége ment
előre úgy, hogy mire leért a völgybe, még meg is állt a földben,
belefuródva a hegyes csonkjával, mintha onnan nőtt volna ki.

– No, ezt csináld utánam, kutyafejű! kiáltá fel onnan az ezer meg ezer
lábnyi mélységből Boldizsár bá, épkézláb szállva le a repülő gépéről. De
biz a tatárnak nem volt kedve eltanulni tőle ezt a pokolra szállás
mesterségét.

Ide alant lett volna hát már, a hozzájárulhatlan hegyszakadékban: de
hogyan már most tovább? mert nem jó a pokolban lakni!

Felülről nézve is veszedelmes hely ez; mikor pedig benne van az ember,
sehogy sem érzi benne magát valami jól. A mi onnan felülről csak morzsa,
az itt koloncz, a mire dolog felmászni. A mikor pedig felmászott az
ember egy ilyen nagy kolonczra, hát akkor látja, hogy észak felé a völgy
egészen el van zárva meredek sziklafalakkal; délfelé nyitottnak látszik,
arra mosolyognak a Hargita ormai: ott van Székelyország.

Csakhogy odáig még sok erdős hegyet kellene megmásznia; s ezek a tatárok
mindent megszálltak már. A mint ott a sziklapárkányon meggyujtják a
lármafát, végtül-végig minden hegyormon kigyulladnak a jeltüzek: nehéz
innen elvinni az irhát, de kivált a turbát.

«Azért mégis csak elvigyük mind a kettőt!»

Nagy szemfüleskedés mellett, fölfedezett az átelleni hegyoldalban valami
ösvényformát, a mi veszedelmes sziklapárkányokon vezetett végig, a hol
az ember, a tíz körmével a sziklarepedésekhez nőtt rekettyébe
kapaszkodva haladhat csak előre, áthidalva vakmerő ugrásokkal az útját
álló szakadékot s Istennek ajánlva lelkét a lába alatt meginduló
sziklagörgeteg végigomlásánál: ez ám a «gőzsikló!»

Csaknem kész este volt már, mikorra Boldizsár bá a Valle Drákulujban
odáig eljutott, a hol az kezd lefelé mélyedni, összeszorulva egy keskeny
vágányba, a hol csak egy ember fér el.

De már ha olyan sötét lesz is, mint a szurok, innen mégis ki kell
szabadulni akárhogy. A szűk hegyvágány teli volt hóval. Az ember csak
azt koczkáztathatta, hogy valahol a fejetetejéig szakad bele s soha ki
nem jöhet belőle. Szánkó kéne ide! De miből faragni? Nincs itt más fa,
mint nyomorék törpe-fenyő, meg boróka; azért is falra kellene elébb
mászni.

Hát a mint legjobban tusakodik magában, csak jön ám fölfelé, épen azon a
szűk úton, a min menekülnie kellene, egy nagy bolond medve, szörnyű
mormogással. Még ki sem lehet térni az útjából.

– Ejnye, maczkó pajtás! zugolódék Boldizsár bá: hát már te is a tatár
zsoldjába álltál? Akkor csakugyan vége az erkölcsnek Moldovában! De hogy
nem alszol te ilyenkor, mint más becsületes medve?

Hát biz a maczkó azért ébredt fel édesded álmából, a mit a vízkeresztig
el nem szokott hagyni, hogy a Boldizsárt üldöző tatárok valahol egy
barlangban letelepültek, tüzet raktak: az pedig a medve téli
rezidentiája volt. A felzavart fenevad azután megugrott s most jön
felfelé nagy bőszülten, a nyári pavillonját keresni, az ott van a
somberkes sziklaoldalban, látszik is a szája.

A mint a maczkó megint embert látott maga előtt, elordítá magát vérivó
kedvében, s két hátulsó lábaira állva, rohant neki nagy fogcsattogással.

– No csak ne egyél meg! Mert bizony furcsa formában várnám be az itélet
napját! Nem is tudom, hogy feltámad-e a medveczukor?

S azzal kegyetlenül a fejéhez csapta a vas turbát a medvének Boldizsár
bá, s míg az nagy haraggal a vasládát ölelte át, az alatt ő igazi
székely tempóval odaugrék hozzá s úgy eltrafálta a hosszú késével a
medvének a szivét, hogy az még csak búcsút venni sem ért rá ettől a szép
világtól.

Ennek hát megadta a magáét! De ez még mind nem volt ám elég az
üdvösségre. Mert a mint a medve megszünt ordítani, rákezdték odalenn a
mély útban mások.

Azt is megtudta, hogy kicsodák. Magától a medvétől. Annak a bőrébe bele
volt akadva három nyílvessző: azt a tatárok lőtték bele futtában, az
egyik talpa össze is volt égve, a mint a tüzükön keresztül gázolt. Ime
azok tehát már jönnek felfelé. Éppen a medve mutatta meg nekik az utat.
Hallik onnan alulról a rikongatásuk.

No most mihez kezdjünk? Visszamenni a Valle Drákulujba, annyi, mint az
egérfogóba belemenni. Amott fenn a sziklaoldalban van a medvének a nyári
barlangja, oda jó lesz elbujni.

De még a megölt medvét is fel kell oda vontatni akárhogy!

Miért? Azért!

Izzadságos munka volt az. A medve nyomott három mázsát. De mégis csak
felvonszolta az odúig.

Igen bizony, de ha a tatárok ideérnek, meglátják a csizmanyomokat a
hóban, s a milyen éles eszük van, még kitalálják, hogy a medve nem hord
csizmát; ember van ott az odúban.

Azt tette hát, hogy lenyiszálta a medvének a két hátulsó lábát s azt a
két kezébe fogva, visszament vele egész addig a helyig, a hol megölte a
vadat, s onnan kezdve aztán háttal, mint a rák, lépegetett négykézláb
visszafelé; minden csizmanyomot gondosan letaposva a szélesebb
medvetalppal, a meddig csak a hó tartott.

Most aztán, ha jön a tatár, a mennyi tudománya van, kifundálhatja
belőle, hogy itt a medve összeakadt egy emberrel; azt megölte, felvitte
a barlangjába és azóta meg is ette.

Egészen így történt.

A mint a tatárok feljöttek égő szurokfenyő-fáklyákkal a szoros útban, a
medve nyomán, s rátaláltak a tusa helyére, a hol a medvenyom és a
csizmanyom összetalálkozott s egy vértócsában veszett el: ott megálltak
tanácsot tartani.

Egy nehány fiatal legény vállalkozott rá, hogy felmegy a barlang
szájáig, megnézi, hogy mi van benne?

Ha a medve odavitte az üldözött székelyt, akkor a hátára kötött turbát
is odavitte. Meg kell azt ott kapni.

Csakhogy a barlanghoz vivő, mély vágányú út olyan keskeny volt, hogy
azon egyszerre csak egy tatár hághatott fel.

Hát, a mint az első tatár közelért a lyukhoz, Boldizsár bá egyszerre
kidugta rajta a medvének a fejét, s maga olyat ordított hozzá, hogy az
bevált akármiféle bassista medve solo-énekének.

A tatárok hanyathomlok bukfenczeztek vissza a szűk ösvényről s azt a
hírt vitték a többieknek, hogy két medve van odafenn: a nősténye
ordított, a kanja csak a fogát vicsorgatta.

Ezeket pedig vérmedvéknek híják, a kik már embert ettek: ezekkel nem jó
komázni.

A tatárok ismét tanácsot ültek. Boldizsár bá egész kényelemmel hallgatta
ki őket onnan a medvepáholyból. Ezermester ne tudna tatárul?

Abban állapodtak meg, hogy ma már, sötét éjjel nem ostromolják meg a
medvebarlangot alulról; hanem holnap, ha világos lesz, visszajönnek,
fölülről kötélen egyet maguk közül a barlang szádáig lebocsátanak, az
mindenféle nyers cziherrel telehányja a medvebarlangot. Akkor aztán a
czihert égő nyilakkal felgyujtják s a medve vagy ott fullad, vagy
kiugrik: övék lesz a barlang. Ha megette is a medve a székelyt, de nem
ette meg a pénzes turbát.

– Ejnye, no bizony ezt ugyan jól kitaláltátok, eszem az anyátok! mondá
magában Boldizsár bá, megértve a gonosz stratagémát. S ismét
szélyelnézdegélt maga körül, hogy kitől lehetne itt segítséget kérni?
Nem voltak ott, csak hárman. Először ő maga, azután a kőszikla, azután
meg a hó. Mire menjen harmadmagával annyi kegyetlen tatár ellen?

Azok pedig nem tágítottak: úgy látszik, komolyan vették az
ostromzárlatot. Boldizsár bá egész jól láthatta a csillagvizsgáló
toronyból, hogy alant a völgyben tüzeket raknak hosszú sorban végig,
azok ott akarnak sütkérezni hajnalig: szökve sem lehetne közöttük
elsurranni, úgy bevilágítják az egész völgyet. Még a danolásuk is
felhallatszik idáig: a pogányok danolni szoktak éjjel a táborban, hogy
el ne aludjanak.

«Mi pedig nem vagyunk, csak hárman: én magam, a kőszikla, meg a hó!»

Hohó! Hisz ez több, mint elég! Itt van a hó! Ez az igazi jó barát! De
még egy másik jó barát is érkezett: a szél; ez meg épen derék czimbora,
mikor úgy maga jószántából elkezd fujni, aztán hordja a havat, csak úgy
sziporkázik tőle a sziklák párkánya!

«Hadd szóljak már most veletek egy szót, édes vendégeim!» mondá
Boldizsár bá s előbujva a medveodúból, csinált a két markával egy kis
hólapdát, azt tovább hentergette a hóban, míg akkorára megnőtt, mint egy
hordó, még előbbre görgette maga előtt, a míg lett belőle egy nagy
hordó. Mikor aztán egyszer kijutott vele a keskeny sziklavágányból, a
hol elkezdődött a völgy öblösödni: ott hatalmasan nekilódítá a hógömböt
a meredélynek. Ment az aztán a maga eszétől nagy sebességgel alá, egyre
töméntelenebbé nőve az útjában felszedett hótömegektől: nagy robaj
támadt utána, recsegtek az útjába eső fák, a miket kitördelt, míg végre
egy mennydörgő zuhanással tölté be a völgyet, a mitől még idefönn is
megrázkódtak a sziklák.

«Ez tiszta munka volt!» mondá Boldizsár bá, a mint széttekintett s
látta, hogy a völgyben egy tűz sem ég már sehol. Azokat mind eltemette a
hógörgeteg; de még a kik körülöttük aludtak, azok is furcsául fognak
majd elbámulni, mikor fölébrednek s akkor látják, hogy a másvilágon
vannak.

No már mostan szabad az út. A görgeteg még simára seperte az egész
csuszkapályát. Már most csak még egy szánkó volna! De hát, hogy ne
volna, mikor van? Gyere maczkó! Menjünk szánkázni! Boldizsár bá
előczepelte a megölt medvét; a két hátulsó lába közé odakötözte a
turbát, széles háta volt a medvének, jobb szánkófeneket építeni sem
lehetne: ő maga ráült a hasára s megkapaszkodott a két lőcsben, a medve
két első lábában; a maczkó feje volt a szánkó orra, az ő saját
csizmasarkai a talpkötő dörzsfék s egyúttal kormányrúd: csakúgy repült
az a bomlott jármű a sík, csapinós vágányon alá, át is ugrott röptében
egy-egy szakadékot, a mibe veszedelmes dolog lett volna beleesni; de még
azután is iramodott előre, a mikor leért a völgybe, a veszedelmes
nekilódulástól: úgy, hogy Boldizsár bának még a süvege is lemaradt a
fejéről a nagy röpülésben; de nem ért rá felvenni, inkább veszni hagyta:
azzal is egy gonddal kevesebb.

Hanem a mint a medveszánkó végre megállt, beletúrva az orrát a
hófuvatba, akkor látta Boldizsár bá, hogy ott lehetett hajdan a
tatárcsapat főhadiszállása, a lófarkas mundzuknak csak a buzogányos vége
áll ki még a hóból. Laknak oda alant egynehányan! De azokat ő nem
sietett kiásni, hanem leszállva a szánkójáról, szétnézett, hogy merre
tágasabb a világ? hová lettek a tatárok?

A tatárok nagy része, a kit a hógörgeteg a völgyben nem kapott, nagy
lármázást mívelt odafenn az erdőben; a lovaik mind meg voltak bolondulva
a rémülettől: elég dolguk volt azoknak a megfékezésével; azoknak nem is
lesz egyhamar kedvük megint ide a völgybe lejönni. Hanem tova egy
magaslaton mégis látott Boldizsár bá egy lovon ülő alakot, a ki iránt
semmi kétsége nem lehetett, a hegyes prémes süvege, a kurta lompos
bundája, meg a hegyes dárdája messziről hirdette nemesi származását.

Ennek a háta mögött ugyan szép csendesen elosonhatott volna Boldizsár
bá; mert ez nagy bölcsen hátat fordított a zimankós szélnek s úgy
belehuzta magát a bunda gallérjába, hogy az orra sem látszott ki belőle;
hanem hát Boldizsár bá azt tartá, hogy nem illik az embernek jó nap
kivánás nélkül elmenni az idegen úr mellett, s odajárulván, azt mondá a
tatárnak:

– Ugyan édes atyámfia, nem adnád nekem ide kölcsön a lovadat, meg a
bundádat holnaputánig? utolsó torjai vásárkor visszahozom. Hanem ezt
csak azután mondta neki, a mikor már a fejszéjével hátulról úgy fejbe
kollintotta, hogy a tatár keresztül esett a lova fején, s nem is mondott
neki ellent: kiadván lelkét.

Boldizsár bá aztán lehuzta a nyakából a bundát s saját vállára keríté, a
prémes süveget is a fejébe tette: «e bizony nem is rossz csere volt:
hiuzbőr a préme; az enyimé csak farkasbőr volt». Azután a tatár lónak
valamit súgott a fülébe, az egyik orralikát befogta, a másikba belefújt,
a mitől az olyan kezes lett, hogy felhagyta ülni a hátára; pedig
különben az ilyen tatár ló hamis: nem veszi fel az idegent; vagy ha
felveszi, aztán oda viszi, a hová az nem akar, a társai közé, haza.

Az ezermester ennek is ismerte a babonáját. A paripa engedelmes lett s
ügetett előre.

Még egy másik tatár előőrsöt is talált Boldizsár bá az útjában, de már
arra messziről rákiáltott: «majd nem alszol! de kinyitod a szemed, álmos
kutya! Megállj, majd adok a nogajkával!» Az a jámbor még meg is kinálta
a kulacsával, csak ne haragudjék. Boldizsár bá megtartotta a kulacsot:
jó lengyel pálinka volt benne; szükség lesz arra ebben a hidegben.

Így aztán minden akadály nélkül kijutott a tatárok kelepczéjéből s
virradóra ott volt a gyergyói havasokon: onnantúl aztán nem is üldözte
még a madár sem, délig emberrel sem találkozott. Minden jó lett volna
már, csak olyan nagyon éhes ne lett volna. Bánta szörnyen, hogy el nem
hozta magával a medve toppancsát, milyen jó volna az most sülve!

De hát jó az Isten! Akkor ád, a mikor nincs. Délben Boldizsár bá egy
pakulár gunyhóhoz jutott, ott épen sajtot öntöttek. Hatan voltak a
legények; a mint a lovas tatár alakot a hosszú dárdával megpillantották,
hatan hétfelé szaladtak, vendelyt, túrót ottan hagytak; még egy
juhászbundát is martalékul felejtettek.

Boldizsár bá aztán leszállván a lováról, elébb kegyesen elimádkozá, hogy
«a ki ételt, italt adott, annak neve legyen áldott!» s aztán kegyetlenül
megtömte a horpaszait a túróval, nagyokat nyakalt rá a savóból, s azzal,
mint a ki a dolgát jól végezé, leheveredék a juhászbundára s olyan jót
aludt, hogy mikor fölébredt, alig tudta a szeme pilláit felnyitni, úgy
le voltak fagyva.

Aztán folytatta az útját az ismerős tájékon. Itt már ismerte a dörgést:
a falu nevét is tudta, a mi ott szemközt jön. Azaz, hogy nem a falu,
hanem csak a népe. A megriadt pakulárok fellármázták a lakosságot, hogy
«jön a tatár!» S most az nagy énekszóval, templomi zászlókkal
processiózik eléje, hogy kegyelmesen fogadja a rettegett pusztítót.

– Ejnye, rusnya békák! rivalt rájuk mérgesen Boldizsár bá, hát már engem
sem ismertek? Nem látjátok, hogy én vagyok Csernátonból a Boldizsár bá?
Én nem hoztam nektek semmit: csak a tatárt a hátamon; de azt ne a
vasvilla nyelével, hanem a hegyes végével köszöntgessétek: látszik, hogy
nektek is csak asszony volt az anyátok, mint az oláhoknak, nem pedig
amazon, mint a csiki székelyeknek! No, majd ha nagyon megijedtek,
jöjjetek utánam: én megbátorítlak.




A MIKÓ-UJVÁRI ÁGYÚK.

Hogy a gyergyói székelyeket miként eszelte fel Boldizsár bá, meg a nagy
veszedelem a határon átözönlő tatárok elfogadására? azt megirtuk egy
másik könyvben. Itt történt az, hogy az asszonyok is fegyvert fogtak,
Apor Andrásné, Cserei Györgyné előkelő urasszonyok vezetése alatt, az
ellenséggel szembeszálltak, a férfiakkal versenyt hadakoztak; itt
örökíté meg hirét-nevét a hős Puskás Kalára, ki jó reményben levő
állapotja mellett, mégis kiment az ütközetbe, s naphosszant harczolva,
hét tatárnak kioltá élete mécsét s azzal hazament estére és szült három
fiut. – Igaz történet ez; a tatárhalom a bizonysága, a hol ezerhétszáz
tatárnak a csontja porladozik, a kiket tűz, vas, asszonykéz és
lezudított tóvíz rakásra ölt a Szárhegy szorosában.

Ez a veszedelem tehát el lett fordítva Mikó-Ujváráról, mely a tatároknak
innen leghamarább esett volna utjában, de hátra volt a másik, az ojtozi
szoroson betörő tatárhad, a melyik Csikot, Háromszéket elözönlötte! ez
ugyan csak később fog megérkezni, de bizonyosan megjön, azt már tudta az
ezermester, nem is a lelkektől, hanem a saját esze járásából. Hogy a
tatár, miután az erdélyi hadsereget, fővezérestül együtt elfogta
Lengyelországban a szultán parancsából, ottan meg nem áll, hanem majd
nekiesik a védtelenül hagyott Erdélynek s azt véges-végig pusztítja, de
még Magyarországba is áttör.

Mert hát ilyen kegyes urunk volt nekünk a szultán, a kinek árnyékában
oly soká pihentünk. Ha szép engedelmesen megvittük neki az adót jó
pénzben, ha vezéreinek megkentük a markát, ha szépen arczraborultunk
előtte s megcsókoltuk a kaftánja szélét, meg ha seregestül megjelentünk
a táborában hadainak számát szaporítani s elég ennivalót is hoztunk
magunkkal, hát akkor megdicsért bennünket, adott játékszereket is, a
mikkel játszhassunk idehaza. De hogyha valami olyanra bátorkodtunk vetni
a fejünket, a mi ő neki nem tetszett, fogott egy korbácsot s úgy
végigvert rajtunk vele, csak úgy repedt a bőrünk. Ez a korbács pedig
mindig ott lógott az ajtófélen: ez volt a krimiai tatárság. A szultánnak
csak intenie kellett: «indulj meg korbács!» s az leszállt magától s
paskolt, míg bele nem fáradt. S ha megunta a szultán a játszásunkat,
elvette a játékszereinket, tömlöczbe csukatta a nagy embereinket, a
kiket ő maga ruházott fel koronával, fejedelemsüveggel.

Boldizsár bá tudta, hogy ez így volt mindig, most is így lesz.

Azért ugyan igyekezett a legegyenesebb uton haza jutni Mikó-Ujvárra. Ott
is nagy szükség lesz ő reá.

Mikó-Ujvár ott feküdt Csikszereda fölött, de ez nem a mostani, az sokkal
nagyobb és fényesebb volt. A gazdag Mikó Ferencz építteté azt, a ki nagy
becsületben állt mind Bethlen Gábor, mind I. Rákóczy fejedelem előtt. A
temetésénél még a fejedelem és a fejedelemasszony is kisérték a halottas
szekerét, pedig unitárius volt. A várat aztán az egyetlen fia, József
örökölte, a ki megint oly szerencsétlenül járt, hogy a lakodalma napján
a lovai megbokrosodtak az üdvlövöldözéstől, a szekeret felborították; –
neki magának a nyaka törött, a szép felesége, Macskási Ilka,
menyasszonyi koszoruval marada özvegyen. Nem soká maradt úgy, nagyhamar
rátalált a vidék legdaliásabb leventéje, a harczban és békében egyaránt
előkelő «primor» Damokos Tamás, ex genere Nyujtód. Mikó-Ujvár, a
gyermektelen elhalt Mikó József után törvény szerint a fejedelemre
szállt volna, de I. Rákóczy meghagyta azt az özvegynél. Itt tartotta
azután székhelyét Damokos Tamás, a ki főkapitány vala Csikban.

Rövid idő mulva II-ik Rákóczy György következett az erdélyi
nagyfejedelmi trónra: a legszebben virágzó kis országot vette át, a mi
mindennel bővelkedett, a mivel csak jó kedvében megáldhat az Isten egy
országot. De Rákóczy mindezzel nem érte be, furdalták a máját a
nagyravágyás férgei. Elhagyta magával hitetni holmi elégedetlen lengyel
főurak által, hogy őt a lengyelek nagyon kivánják királynak a mostani
helyett: ohajtanak egy országgá lenni a kis Erdélylyel. Elhitte nekik és
felült. Összeszedte a szép vitéz erdélyi sereget; se kérdett, se
hallott, berontott Lengyelországba s egész Krakkóig ment, azt el is
foglalta, mert szép vitéz serege volt együtt… Az öreg apó onnan
Stambulból hiába kiabált utána: «megállj gyerek! mert biz a fenekedre
verek!» hallatlanná tette a szót, csak előre igyekezett. Mikor aztán ott
volt Krakkóban, akkor vette észre, hogy nem jó helyen jár; nem várják őt
itten se a főpapok, se a főnemesek, se a diæta, hogy megkoronázzák.
Akkor aztán már ment volna vissza, ha lehetett volna; – de már a hátán
volt a nagyapó korbácsa. Kétszázezer tatár állta el az utját
Erdélyország felől. Maga aztán aláirta a legcsufosabb capitulatiót, a mi
alatt csak valaha fejedelem neve pironkodott s egy oldalugrással
elmenekült Magyarország felé. A szép erdélyi hadsereg pedig, köröskörül
fogva a lengyel király, a tatár khán, meg a szepesi sztaroszta
hadseregeitől, agyonéhezve, fáradva; a tél viharától a mezőn meglepetve:
vezérestül együtt fogságra jutott a legkegyetlenebb ellenség, a tatár
khán kezébe. – Ez azonban még nem volt elég a pogánynak: a mint az
erdélyi vitézek táborát elvitte Krimiába, betört minden oldalról
Erdélybe: oda voltak a legjobb vitézek; nem volt kit szembeállítani a
gyilkos csordával, a kit annyiszor visszavertek a székelyek. – Végig
pusztított a rabló had az egész országon, égetve, rombolva, s a nép
szinét-javát szőrpányvára füzve. Kilenczvenötezer férfit hajtottak el
Erdélyből Krimiába. Ugyanannyi asszonyszív vérzett idehaza miattuk.

Biz ez nem igen szép történet; de hát előre kell bocsátanunk, hogy az
ezután következőket hozzáépíthessük.

Mikor Boldizsár bá, a tatárkölcsönözte lovával megérkezék Mikóvárra: még
akkor senki sem tudott semmit a nagy gyászról, hogy az egész erdélyi
hadsereg hadi fogságba esett. Nem is álmodott erről senki. Boldizsár még
a fegyverlerakás előtt menekült el, s olyan gyorsan vágtatott
éjjel-nappal, lóhalálában, hogy még a madár sem előzhette volna meg.

Ő volt tehát a legelső gyászhirnök, a ki Ilka asszonynyal tudatta a hős
Damokos Tamás szomorú végzetét.

– Gyászholló vagyok, galambom: szegény raburadnak izenetét hozom.

S azzal elmondá neki, hogy mit izent Damokos Tamás nagy veszedelméből s
átadá neki a pénzzel telt turbát, a kulcsával együtt.

Ilka sirva fakadt erre a gyászhirre, s kezét tördelé kétségbeestében.

– Jaj, édes mézem, ne kezdj most a siráshoz: nem érünk most arra,
hagyjuk ezt tavaszra, mikor jobban ideje lesz. Ne félj: nincsen még
semmi baja az uradnak. Hadi fogságba elviszik; nem bántják: tudják, hogy
főkapitány, nagyon megbecsülik; sok váltságdijat várnak érte. A
váltságdijat ime elhoztam magammal. Itt van, egy rakáson. Most már csak
az lenne a nagy baj, ha valahogy, valami réven ez a pénz elsikkadna:
mert akkor ugyan ott veszne Krimiában a jó Damokos Tamás urunk.

Az asszony letörülte a könyeit s azt mondá Boldizsár bának, hogy nem fog
hát többet sirni, a míg egyéb dolga lesz: mondja meg, mit tegyen?

– Hát legelőbb is arra kell gondolnunk, hogy ezt a Mikó várát úgy
megvédelmezzük, hogy a tatár el ne foglalhassa.

– Én Istenem! Hisz ez a Mikóvár nem erős vár.

– Majd erőssé tegyük. Te már azt csak bizd rám, édes hugomasszony. Én
mindenről gondoskodom, te csak azután láss, hogy legyen a hadi népségnek
mit enni. Az asszonyok süssenek, főzzenek, a papok imádkozzanak, a
többit majd előteremtem én.

Biz azt a Mikó-Ujvárát nem nevezték hajdanában erős várnak, mert még
csak valamely hegytetőn sem büszkélkedik, a minek a három oldala
megmászhatatlan, a negyedik pedig bevehetetlen; hanem ott fekszik a
sikság közepén, négyszögletre kiépítve, inkább csak várkastély,
vendégelfogadásra, nem ellenség visszaverésére. Van ugyan egy kis gyarló
bástyája s azt vizárok veszi körül, de az a viz fenékig befagy, ott megy
át rajta a tatár, a hol akar s vasfejű gerendákkal rést tör a falon,
akármilyen vitézül védi magát a benszorult népség.

Immár a szegény illyefalvi székelyek is így jártak. Öt napig védelmezték
magukat a kis várukban a tengersokaságú tatár ellen, akkor rájuk
döntötték a sánczot, a kiket le nem vágtak belőlük, mind elhurczolták
rabságra, nem maradt meg az egész városból több egy gyermeknél, a ki a
folyam partja alá elbujt.

Az illyefalvi nagy veszedelemnek a hire csak egy héttel később érkezett
meg Mikó-Ujvárra, mint Czirjék Boldizsár hadnagy. De ez a hét nem mult
el hiába.

A kapitány távollétében ő volt a parancsnok, neki engedelmeskedett a nép
apraja-örege. Jól mondám: mert csak az apraja, meg az örege volt otthon;
a derék sereg, a férfihad el volt már fogva.

Azért csak összegyüjtött egy védő csapatot Boldizsár bá: minden öreg
mellé egy sihedert; aztán kifundálta a hadi taktikát, a négy legöregebb
pixidáriussal. (A «lófő» mind ott maradt a táborral.)

– Nem úgy csináljuk ám a dolgunkat, a hogy a jó becsületes illyefalvai
atyánkfiai tették: hogy közel ereszszük a falainkhoz a tatárt, a honnan
kanóczos nyilakkal ránk gyujthatja a tetőt, kiszedheti a szemünk szőrét;
hanem azon leszünk, hogy távol tartsuk őket a testünktől. Innen is, tul
is Csik-Szereda előtt nagy földvárat hányunk, s akár szembe, akár hátul
támad ránk az ellenség, úgy leágyúzzuk, hogy a szeme is szikrát hány
bele.

– Leágyúznók ám, ha volna mivel? mondá Mihály bá, a legvénebb puskás. De
az a négy réztaraczk, a mi a nagyasszony kastélyában van, csak
lakodalmas nép elejbe puffogatni való.

– Már pedig én nekem huszonnégy ágyú kell.

– Ha csak a földből nem nő ki?

– Hát igenis, hogy onnan nő ki! Mire való ez a szép veresfenyő erdő?
Semmi szégyen se lesz az a tatárnak, ha mi fa-ágyúval lövöldözünk belé.

Az öregek csóválták a fejüket; de tudták, hogy Boldizsár bá ezermester;
hát csak engedtek a parancsolatjának. Levágták a huszonnégy szál fát, s
azokkal a nagy fúrókkal, a mik a bányaviz szivattyucsöveihez valók,
végig fúrták valamennyit.

– De már most, hogy lövünk mi ebből? aggóskodék Mihály bá; hisz az
elől-hátul lukas. Ezt ha elsütjük, akkorát fog lőni hátrafelé, mint a
mekkorát előre. De hogyan is süssük el? hisz ha az oldalán gyujtó lyukat
furunk: akkor az egész csövet az első lövés kétfelé repeszti.

– Majd lesz annak módja! Nyugtatá Boldizsár. Ugy-e bár, ha a puskád
csöve tele megy homokkal elől a szájánál, hát akkor a töltés, inkább,
hogysem azt az ezernyi homokszemet egyenkint kitologassa, kapja magát,
szétveti a puskád csövét az agyánál. No hát! Ennek a faágyúnak a hátulsó
likán előbb bedugjuk a golyókkal, szegekkel, vagdalt ólommal, s más
efféle csemegékkel tele zacskót; utána a puskaporos zacskót; azután
pedig betömjük azt, mentül lazábban száraz homokkal. Nem lesz annak a
homoknak semmi baja a lövés után. Az ágyút pedig aképen sütjük el, hogy
egy ember oda tart egy megtüzesített végű kopját a tömő homokhoz, a
másik egy pőrölylyel ráüt a kopjanyél tulsó végére, s mingyárt kész lesz
a durranás.

Hej, ha tudta volna Boldizsár bá, hogy ő találta ki a hátultöltő
czindnádel fegyvernek a fortélyát!

Még azután a faágyúkat belül kibéllelte összegöngyölített vas pléhvel,
kívül behuzatta nyers ökörbőrrel, s megpántoltatta vasabroncsokkal, hogy
annál jobban szolgáljanak.

De már most puskapor is kéne, ahhoz pedig malom kell.

Hogyan fundálta ki, hogyan nem, én azt meg nem mondom; de végre azt is
csak előállítá Boldizsár bá. Puskaport is fábrikált ő; még pedig nem
feketét, hanem fehéret: azt mondta, hogy ez azért jobb, mert nincs olyan
erős tüze, nem gyujtja meg az ágyút.

Akkor aztán elhelyezteté a maga ágyúit a földből hányt bástyákra, s azt
mondta, hogy «no már most nem bánom, ha jön is az a tatár».

Az pedig jött; jó orra volt: megszagolta, hogy Csik-Szeredán jó préda
vár reá, csak Mikóujvárával kell neki elbánni: az pedig félagyarára is
kevés.

A tatár nem hordott magával ágyút: nem is értett hozzá. A sokaságában
volt az ereje, a kegyetlenségében a hatalma; gyorsaságában a veszedelmes
volta. Egyenesen vágott keresztül a rengeteg erdőn, a mi utját állta,
utczát taroltatva maga előtt az előre hajtott foglyaival.

Csak úgy feketéllett a mező a hegyes süvegeiktől, mikor a porfelleg
elszállt, a mit maguk előtt vertek. Mint a szélvész, oly sebesen jöttek.

– De majd visszafelé milyen gyorsan fogtok menni! Mondá Boldizsár bá s
jó közelre beváratta őket. – Azok fel sem vették azt a kis földturást
ott a sikságon s lóháton akartak rajta átgázolni.

Mikor aztán jó közel jöttek, egy parittya vetésre: akkor megszólaltatott
ellenük Boldizsár bá egy pár ágyút.

Bevált biz az! A faágyúk jól szuperáltak. A szeges zsák, meg a lánczos
golyóbisok csunya felköszöntést adtak a tatárnak. Szokás szerint
megrőkönyödének s rögtön hátat fordítottak. A murzáik azonban
korbácscsal terelték ismét össze a csapatjaikat s pokolébresztő nagy
zsivajjal zudíták tömegestől a lovasságukat a földsáncz ellen.

Most aztán tíz szörnyeteg okádta egyszere a sárkánytüzet a fejeikre:
egész pusztulás lett bennük; s nehogy valami kétségük legyen az iránt,
hogy mi az odahátul? alig mult el egy felfohászkodás, Boldizsár bá mind
a tizenkét ágyúval odacserdített közéjük.

Nem ettek ilyet a tatárok még soha.

Azok ott ördögökkel vannak.

A tatár vezér nagyon megszégyenlé magát a kudarczon s elővéve szokott
taktikáját, egy csoportot az erdőn keresztül a székelyek megkerülésére
küldött. Mindig így szokták azt, kozákok, tatárok: a kik együtt járnak.

Az illyefalvai siralmas krónika is így énekli:

  «Kozák kurtány falat vágja,
  Tatár tüzét ránk bocsátja.»

A vad nép nyílzáporral szokja messziről megtámadni, sebbe ejteni, lángba
borítani az ellensége hadsorát és várát: az egész kedvük ellenére volt,
hogy a másiknak meg olyan lövő szerszáma legyen, a mi az ő tegzénél
messzebb hord. Pedig bizony a csikszeredai ágyúk sem voltak különb
fegyverek a számszerijjnál.

A míg a kerülő csapat az átelleni völgy felől alászállt: addig a
szemközt álló tatárok csak abban mesterkedtek, hogy egyes vitézeik előre
nyargaltak, vitézi párbajra hivogatni fel a székely daliákat. Kár, hogy
olyan közel egyik sem hozta a képes felét, hogy Boldizsár bá a kovás
puskájával megtisztelhette volna. (Hiszen volna csak itthon Damokos
Tamás, majd megmutatná az tinektek, hogy hány mázsát nyom egy font vas,
mikor kardnak van lapítva! De hát nem voltak itt a daliák, csak a
bölcseséghez kellett folyamodni.)

Odafenn a vár sánczain az asszonysereg állt őrt, szemfüleskedve
mindenfelé. Damokosné meg künn a bástyaszegleten egész ökröt süttetett,
bort üttetett csapra, hogy a tatárok láthassák, mily bővében vannak az
ostromoltak mindennek: a gyerkőczök sem maradtak dologtalan, hordták az
ételt, italt a harczoló csapatoknak.

Az őrtálló csapatok hamar észre is vevék, hogy az új erdő vágásan
keresztül ugyancsak nyomakodik előre egy tatár csapat a város
megkerülésére s jelt adának idejekorán Boldizsárnak. A hadnagy azonnal
utasítást adott az alhadnagyának, ki a tulsó sánczban vigyázott. Ez
pedig Mihály bá volt. A hátulsó sáncz pedig úgy el volt rejtve
gyalogfenyő-bokrokkal, hogy abból semmi sem látszott: a közeledő
gyümölcsös kertnek nézhette.

A megkerülő tatár csapat lármafával adott jelt a hegytetőről a tábornak,
s akkor egyszerre támadtak minden oldalról a mikóvári sánczok ellen, a
mikor aztán lett olyan nagy ágyúzás, hogy három mértföldnyi kerületben
minden vad elszaladt az erdőből. De nem csak a vad, a tatár is
elszaladt, a ki ott nem maradt. A gonosz pogány had véres fejjel lett
visszaverve Mikóvár alul, pedig csak öreg emberek és suhanczok álltak
vele szemközt: fából csinált ágyúk dörögtek ellenük.

A murza maga rohant utoljára a Boldizsár bá által védett sáncz ellen, a
mundzukos lófarkat kezébe ragadva, s nem törődve az ellene szórt tört
patkódarabokkal, miket zsákszámra okádának a faágyúk. – Ekkor azonban
egy ilyen fenyőfa-csatakigyó azt a tréfát mivelte, hogy nagyon erős
lőportöltést kapván, a kartácscsal együtt magát az ágyú béllését, az
összegöngyölt pléhcsövet is kilőtte a csőből, s az mint valami röpülő
tüzes sárkány, úgy szállt nagy süvöltve a tatárok közé. – Ez már nagyon
erős argumentum volt! A hol már az ágyút is ellövik az emberre: ott nem
lehet megmaradni! A murza a hátára kapta a pajzsát, s úgy elfutott
ijedtében, hogy a saját hivei sem érték éjszakánál elébb utól.

Boldizsár bá azonban jól tudta azt, hogy mikor valaki a tatárt egyszer
megverte, akkor még ne tartson «Te Deum laudamust», mert az annak még
nem elég. Nappal megfutott, éjszaka visszatér: s iszonyú boszút áll.
Kétszer kell a tatárnak a fejére ütni, mert az különben be nem veszi a
tanácsot.

A mint leszállt az éjszaka, sötét felleges idő lett: Boldizsár bá
kiválogatott százat a legjobb lábú ficzkók közül; azoknak a számára
készített óriási nagy fakardokat, mikor aztán már nagyon sötét volt,
akkor levezette őket egész a táborba szállt tatárseregig. Ott az erdő
oltalmában valamennyinek a képét, meg a fapallosát bekente valami
ördöngös zsírral, a mitől az ábrázat és kard úgy fénylett a sötétben,
mintha tűzből volna.

«No most rajta, hopp a Jézus nevével! Szűz Mária hírével!»

A tüzes arczú alakok, a lángoló kardokkal nagy sivalkodás mellett
rohanának a fáradtan elpihent tatárokra; azok meg, mint a kiket az
ördögök szálltak meg, olyan rémüléssel kavarodtak fel erre a túlvilági
rémek támadására, s egymást gázolták el a nagy szaladásban.

Boldizsár bá fakardos suhanczai még jobban megverték a tatárt másodszor
is, mint a hogy a faágyus aggastyánai.

– No már most énekelhetünk egyet, kedveskéim! mondá Czirjék Boldizsár a
sivó-rívó asszonyoknak: ezek már nem bántanak minket többé.

Nem is mentek a tatárok Mikóvárnak a tájékára sem többet. A murza
visszafutott a khánhoz, s a prófétára esküdött, hogy olyan ellenségre
még nem akadt, mint a «kisértetek völgyében».[1] Mindig óvták attól az
oláhok is, hogy oda ne menjen, mert ottan földalatti lelkek uralkodnak;
de ugyan tapasztalta ennek az igazságát, mert ottan nemcsak hogy száz
ágyut sütögettek el a népe közé, de utoljára magát az ágyut is közéjük
röpíték; éjjel pedig tüzes arczú dzsinek szálltak le az égből,
lángpallosokkal: a kire csak ránéztek is, rögtön korommá sült a
tekintetüktől. Ezért aztán Mikóvár vidéke – ezen tatárjárás alatt – meg
lett szabadítva mindenféle kelletlen látogatástól.




BENN AZ ELLENSÉG A VÁRBAN.

Czirjék Boldizsár azért nem feküdt le a fülére, de mindig csak
félszemmel aludt, a másikkal az ellenségre vigyázott; mindenütt ott
vala, hogy az ellenség meg ne lephesse a várat. Végtére aztán ez a
zivatar is csak elmult a maga jó kedvéből, a tatár telerabolva magát,
haza ment a prédával, meg a sok rabszíjra füzött fogolylyal. A fejedelem
is hazakerült, az országgyülés is összeült; azok aztán kegyetlenül
egymás hajába kaptak, ki rebellált, kit száműztek: egyszóval minden
rendbe jött.

Százezer harczos férfi ugyan ott sinylett Krimiában rablánczon, hanem az
is mind rendben volt. Gazdája akadt valamennyinek. Itthon pedig a magas
kormány az előkelő özvegyeknek és árváknak tutorokat rendelt, ennél
többet pedig nem lehet kivánni.

Boldizsár bá is megkapta a parancsolatot, hogy leültetheti már a csiki
hadakat, nincs rájuk több szükség, lássanak a mezei munka után. A
csizmadiák menjenek csizmát varrni. Az ágyukat olvasztassa be s az
anyagot küldje fel Szebenbe, hadd öntsenek belőlük harangot. Boldizsár
bá hiven tűzbe tétette a faágyuit és a hamuját lelkiismeretesen
felküldte Szebenbe, öntsenek belőle harangot, ha tudják a módját.

Csak azután, hogy mindent elintézett, tért haza ő is Mikóujvárára, a hol
a hadnagyi felügyelet volt a hivatalos dolga.

Legelébb is felkereste az ő kedves urasszonyát, a ki talpig gyászba
öltözve fogadta, s százszor is köszönte neki azt a sok jó szolgálatot, a
mit neki és családjának tett; igérte, hogy soha sem fogja elfelejteni.

– Már most hát, édes hugomasszony (a Czirjékek és Damokosok vérszerinti
rokonok voltak), mondá Boldizsár bá: a legelső dolgunk az legyen ám,
hogy a mi Tamásunkat kiszabadítsuk onnan a tatár fogságából, mert neki
sem jó ottan lenni, de neked sem jó ám itten magadban lenned azzal a két
kis ártatlan porontytyal.

– Minden bizonynyal, az lesz az első dolgunk, édes bátyám. Egyébiránt
addig sem vagyok itten egészen tanács nélkül hagyva, a jó fejedelem
gondoskodott róla, hogy a diæta rendeljen ide «tutort» a kis gyermekeim
számára, s nekem szükségben tanácsadót.

Boldizsár bá nagyot törült erre a szóra az orrán (boszuságtól viszketett
az!) s azt dörmögé, hogy biz a jó fejedelem még sokkal jobb fejedelem
lett volna akkor, ha maradt volna itthon medvéket vadászni, mint hogy
elvitte a családapákat az operentiákra, koronát vadászni, a kiknek a
helyébe aztán most tutorokat ültet. Egyébiránt ki légyen az az
iderendelt tutor, ha szabad a nevét tudni?

Ilka asszony mondá neki, hogy az bizony Apor István uram ő kegyelme.

Hüh be nagyot ugrott erre a szóra Boldizsár bá; a süvegét pedig úgy
vagdalta a padlóhoz, hogy az olyanokat puffant, mint egy mozsárágyu.

– Oh te szent Pilátus! Oh te szent Herodes! s még a hány füzfánfütyülő
szent van a világon! Hisz akkor benn van a várban az ellenség!

– Micsoda ellenség?

– Micsoda ellenség? Az, a ki rosszabb a töröknél, rosszabb a tatárnál; a
ki jobban megéget, mint a tűz, jobban felforgat, mint a földindulás.
Ugyan hogy tudtad azt ide beereszteni?

– Ugyan mit tud kegyelmed Apor István ellen?

– De bizony eleget. A mit a pápisták hét főbűnnek hínak, az mind meg van
benne, csordultig tetézve.

– Példának okáért.

– Először nagy benne a kevélység. Nem tudja elfelejteni, hogy azoktól a
hatalmas Aporoktól származik, a kik hajdan Erdélynek vajdákat adtak;
Bálványosban most is uralkodnak. Ezért képes volna elárulni minden
atyafiát, a ki fölötte áll, hogy annak a helyébe ő juthasson. Azután
irigye minden embernek, a kit csak az Isten valamivel megáldott; az
egyiktől irigyli a vagyont, a másiktól a jó hírnevet, a harmadiktól az
észt, a negyediktől a családi boldogságot, s képes rá, hogy azt semmivé
tegye, csak azért, hogy másnak se legyen, a mi neki nincsen. Azután jön
a fösvénység, a kapzsiság, a pénzhetnémség: kártyán nyerni,
uzsoráskodni, örökséget hajhászni, simoniát űzni, ebben ő mind tudós.
Kétszeresen árva az, a kinek ő lett a gyámja, mert azt egy ingben,
mezitláb teszi az utczára. Azután iszákos, a bort nem is issza, hanem
úszik benne; s ha feltette az Orbán süvegét, akkor meg garázda, véres
verekedő, belevész az édes apjába is, s a papját is megveri; haragtartó
lelke soha el nem felejti, ha egyszer megbántották, s nagy idő multával
is boszút áll érte. Mindjárt kész a kardjához kapkodni. Hanem annál
restebb, ha valami üdvösséges dolog van rája bízva. Akkor mindig azt
mondja, «majd holnap, majd holnap!» Ha egy irgalmas kiáltással
megszabadíthatna valakit, még azt is resteli; ha a lábával eltaposhatna
egy üszköt, még azt sem teszi meg: elnézi, csupa restségből, csupa
tácsóságból, hogyan lesz belőle nagy tűz.

– Ejnye, de összegyüjtötte kegyelmed a hét fő bűnöket szegény Apor
István fejére.

– Még csak hatot számláltam el; a hetedik hátra van, hogy azzal kössem
be a koszorúját. A legfőbb vétke az, hogy fajtalan, buja indulatú; a ki
előtt semmi asszonyi erény sem szent, akár szolgálónál, akár
fejedelemnőnél legyen található. Ha egyszer ez az indulat elvakítja:
akkor nincs az a gonosztett, a mitől visszarettenjen, csak czélját
elérje.

Ilka asszony gondolá magában, hogy Boldizsár bá a valláskülönbség miatt
gyűlöli ilyen nagyon Apor Istvánt, s csillapítólag hozá fel:

– De gondolja meg kegyelmed, jó Boldizsár bátyám, hogy ő az én szegény
jó Tamásomnak régi jó barátja.

– Hisz az a hiba. Inkább ellensége volna!

– Még atyafia is.

– Mint Ábelnek Kain.

– Aztán én nekem meg nagyon jó akaróm.

– Hiszen azt is tudom.

– Gyászos özvegységem szomorú napjaiban, szegény első uram halála után,
igen sokat feljárt hozzám, vigasztalt, tanácsolt; a mit csak kivántam
tőle, mindent megtett értem.

Boldizsár bá minden egyes mondásra ráintett a fejével, s aztán hozzá
toldá:

– Úgy, úgy! Még gitározott is neked és énekelt mellé! Mert azt hitte,
hogy hozzá mégy. Szerelmes volt beléd.

– Én belém? szólt Ilka elbámulva. Én nem adtam arra neki semmi okot.

– Elég ok egy asszonynak az, hogy szép, arra, hogy szeressék. Te nálad
azonban még egygyel több ok is volt. Tudod jól, hogy mikor szegény első
urad olyan szerencsétlenül végezte életét: a fejedelem (Isten nyugtassa
meg, de derék jó úr volt! Bár még most is élne!), hát a fejedelem, a
kire a magtalanul elhunyt Mikó József minden birtoka visszaszállt, azt a
szót ejté ki, hogy bizony annak fogja donátiózni az egész Mikóujvárt
dominiumostól, a ki a szegény fiatalon gyászban hagyott özvegyet
feleségül veszi. Ezt orrontotta meg Apor István uram, s ezért taposgatta
olyan szorgalmasan körülötted a földet. S most megint itt van az
alkalom, megint özvegy lettél: nincsen urad, s ő tőle függ, hogy
visszakerüljön-e valaha, vagy végkép odaveszszen. «Kecskére bizták a
káposztát!»

Ilka asszony csak mosolygott.

– No hát lássa kegyelmed, hogy mennyire csalatkozik ez emberben: íme az
most is abban jár, hogy legnagyobb készséggel meghozza az engedelmet a
szultán tihájától szegény férjemnek azonnal kiszabadítására. Annyit
lótott-futott már eddig is, hogy sikerült neki megtudnia, mely várba
vitték Tamásomat, kinek hatalmában van, ki a gazdája? A váltságdíj felől
is ki van már egyezve a tatárral, s csak a postáját várja vissza, hogy
megtudja, hová hozzák őt ki, hová kell küldeni a pénzt érette, rögtön ő
maga fog érette elmenni, ő hozza el maga szegény Tamásomat. Láthatja
kegyelmed, hogy ez egy igazi nemes szív.

– Hallom, de nem látom, s ha látom, sem hiszem: valami kutyaság lesz
ennek a saroglyájában. Az én Están komám soha sem tett még semmit
nemeslelküségből, s nem hiszem, hogy a climactericus esztendeje jött
volna meg, a mikor az embernek a természete rögtön megváltozik.
Veszedelem lesz ennek a vége! Ezt súgja nekem a kisujjam. Hanem hát jól
van. Te csak légy nyugodt és várj minden jókat, majd ébren leszek én. Ha
Apor István uramat megtették a te tutorodnak, majd megteszem én magamat
az ő tutorának, s fogadom, hogy én jobban fogok vigyázni az ő árva
fejére, mint ő a te árváidra. Az Isten szabadítson meg e gyászruhától.

Ilka szépen megköszönte még egyszer Boldizsár bának az eddigi sok
jóságát s az egész beszédből semmi tövis sem maradt a lelkében: ő nem
hitte azt, hogy rossz emberek lehessenek a világon (ha csak nem
kutyafejű tatárok), s azt gondolta Boldizsárról, hogy ez olyan ember, a
kinek sok észt adott az Isten, több bajt lát a világon, mint a mennyi
valósággal létezik.

Apor István uram számára berendezték a vár legszebb szobáit. Boldizsár
bá a földszinti boltozatban lakott.




BUZDURGÁN.

A mit Ilka asszony megtudott az elfogott férje felől, az mindössze annyi
volt, hogy a rabbá lett Damokos Tamásnak a gazdája Buzdurgán murza.

Ezt hírül hozták neki illyefalvi szökevények, a kiknek sikerült
rabságukból kimenekülni s ezer veszély és kiállott nyomoruság után a
«záptenger» halálbűzű morotváin keresztül, nagy vargabetűvel haza
kerülni.

Ezek ugyan rettenetes dolgokat tudtak regélni Krimiáról és az
odahurczolt rabmagyarok borzasztó sorsáról. Hogy hurczolták őket ló
mellé kötözve, hogy etették, itatták őket olyan «gazzal», a mit meglátni
is undorodás; hogy fogták őket olyan sanyarú munkára, a mit idehaza a
barmok végeznek. Ezek közt pedig legkeservesebb volt az állatbőrök
kallózása, csávázása, cserzése, lugzása.

A krimiai tatárok marokin-bőripara hires volt az egész világban. Nem
tudtak olyat sehol előállítani. Rabszolga kellett annak a készítéséhez.
Eszes állat, a ki baromszolgálatot végez. A krimi tatárok hirhedt
bőriparuk által kincseket halmoztak össze; el lehet mondani, hogy a
Bakcsi-Szeráji és Akhtiári tatár fejedelmi paloták bőrből lettek építve.
Minden finom saru, keztyű, a pompás könyvtáblák a régi könyvtárak
incunábuláin, a préselt borítékok a karos székeken, az úrnők czipői s a
fejedelmi paloták aranynyal, ezüsttel kivert bőrszőnyegei, mind a krimi
tatároktól származtak.

Átkozott munka volt annak az előállítása!

A legelső csáva, a mibe a bőröket beáztatták, a legrondább hulladék,
marótrágya keveréke volt, a minek bűzét megszokni nagyobb gyötrelem volt
a purgatoriumnál. Ebben a keverékben kellett térdig gázolni, könyökig
vájkálni a szegény raboknak: szabad ember semmi fizetésért meg nem tette
volna.

Azoknak, a kik ezzel a legelső csávába rakott bőrrel bántak, a karjaik
és lábszáraik olyan feketékké váltak, mintha szerecsentől kérték volna
kölcsön.

Azután jött a bőröknek eczetben, füzfahéjlúgban, savanyú lótejben
keresztül erjesztése, a minél megint olyan hőséget kellett kiállniok,
hogy az bevált a pokol előcsarnokának.

De legrosszabb sorsuk volt azoknak, a kik a finom szattyánbőrt készíték,
mert annak meg az volt a módja, hogy a lenyúzott állatbőrt összevarrták,
szumachgubicsport tettek bele, s akkor egy embernek egy csövön át addig
kellett belefujni, míg az irha simára felpuffadt, mint egy bendő: így
került az aztán a csávába. Ettől a munkától az ember tüdejének
előbb-utóbb meg kellett szakadni.

No hát erre volt jó a rabszolga.

A derék krimi bőrgyárosok gondoskodtak róla, hogy soha szükséget ne
szenvedjenek: az európai uraságokat marokinnal, szattyánnal és
bagariával mindig elláthassák.

A legtöbb rabszolgát Oroszországból hordogatták el. Maga Dewlet Ghirai
khán alatt, Moszkvából és környékéből nyolczszázezer munkást hajtottak
el bőrt gyártani Krimiába s egy egész százötvenezer főre menő orosz
hadsereget elfogtak mindenestől a tatárok.

A rabszolgákból ritkán került valaki haza.

Az a kegyetlen, sanyarú munka rövid idő alatt elpusztította a vele
foglalkozókat; a kik kiállták, sem telepedhettek meg. A férfit és nejét
(ha fiatal volt) nem hagyták együtt: a rabszolgaságból nem származik új
ivadék. A kit nagy áron ki nem váltottak: az ott veszett a csávában,
vagy elmult magától, ha megvénült. Idegen nem települt meg a félszigeten
a tatárokon kívül, csak épen a koraita zsidó, a ki ott földműveléssel,
kertészkedéssel, állattenyésztéssel foglalkozott.

A leghiresebb bőr volt ez idő szerint a «buzdurgán».

Azt a zománczos színt, azt a kigyófényhez hasonló arany-ezüst
ragyogványt, azt a művészi préselést, azt a magas izlésre mutató rajzot,
pompát, színvegyüléket, a mi e bőröket oly nagybecsűekké tette, nem
birták utánozni se a francziák, se a mórok Spanyolországban. Ez a
tatárok titka volt.

S ezt a bőrt azért hivták «buzdurgán»-nak, mert a kinek a gyárában az
készült, az volt Buzdurgán murza maga. (Most már csak egy hires krimiai
körtefaj tartogatja a nevének az emlékét; bőrt csinálnak mások is azóta,
de olyan szépet soha, mint a buzdurgán volt.)

Buzdurgán murza különben is kiváló nevezetesség volt. A megszokott
emberi mérveket meghazudtoló rengeteg óriás; a kinek a legmagasabb férfi
is elsétálhatott a hóna alatt: a bibliai Góliáth második kiadásban.

Mint előkelő murza, ő volt a vezére egy egész dandárnak, s annálfogva,
mikor hadba kellett menni, ő is lóháton ült. De ő nem úgy lovagolt, mint
más jámbor ember, a ki a kengyelbe dugja a lábát; hanem a hogy a kutyán
szoktak nyargalni, hogy a lovagnak a két lába is éri a földet, s a
hányat lépett a lova, annyit lépett ő is, úgy hogy hat lábbal futottak;
s annál gyorsabb volt a haladásuk, minthogy még a lovas is segített a
lónak szaladni. Volt neki egy iszonyú nagy kardja, a mivel egy vágással
ketté tudott hasítani egy embert, a sisakjától kezdve a nyereg kápájáig;
s tizenötfontos buzogányával tovább tudott hajítani, mint más ember a
parittyával.

És a mellett tetőtől talpig pánczélba volt öltözve, mikor csatába ment.
A pánczélja csupa egymásra fekvő árticsókaszerű lemezekből állott, a mik
mint a halpikkelyek fedezték egymást, finom aczélból voltak készülve; de
elől a mellükön aranyveretű korán-mondatokkal ékesítve, a két vállán
pedig ezüst madarakkal, és trombitafarkú kutyácskákkal. Maga a pánczélja
nyomott egy mázsát s megért három falut. A dárdája pedig beillett
árbocznak.

Hanem hát Buzdurgán murza holmi dib-dáb csatában elő se vette a kardját,
buzogányát, dárdáját: elég volt neki maga a nogajka. Ez egy hosszú,
szíjból font korbács volt, végtül végig megrakva réz- és ólomgombokkal.
A kire ezzel egyet végig húzott, nem kellett annak többet semmi kenet
ezen a világon. A futó ellenséget kergetve, csak ezzel csapkodott
jobbra-balra maga körül, s hullott előtte a halandó, mint a letört
bogáncs.

A mellett a hangja olyan volt, hogy egy mértföldnyire meg lehetett
hallani, mikor neki ereszté az ordításnak, s ha az ellenséget hivogatta
vele, bizony inába szállt a lelke ettől a nagy hangtól a legbátrabbnak
is.

No hát ez volt az a Buzdurgán murza, a ki a jó Damokos Tamásnak a
rabtartó gazdája lett.

Így hozták azt hirül Ilka asszonynak a hazatérő illyefalvi menekülők.
Így tudósítá őt Apor István uram is.

Napról napra többet kellett Ilkának hallani a borzasztó Buzdurgán murza
felől, meg a rab magyarok válogatott szenvedéseiről, azoktól a
menekültektől, a kiket Apor István uram a várba hozogatott s Ilka
asszony az asztalához ültetett, a családjával együtt vendégelte meg,
hogy mindig a könyei hullottak a tányérjára, s egy falatot nem volt
képes enni, mikor azt hallotta, hogy a szegény magyar raboknak a tatár
tört kölest ad ételül, feleresztve savanyú lótejjel, vagy pedig lóhust,
a mihez nem kapnak sót, úgy hogy a bőrgyártáshoz való salétromot
használják só helyett.

Boldizsár bá, a kinek ezeket szintén mind végig kellett hallgatni, mert
mint várnagy, ő is ott ebédelt Ilka asszony úri asztalánál, utoljára már
megsokallta azt a sok szerencsétlenkedést, s a hirhordó menekülteket még
a kapuban elfogdosta: «mit akarsz? honnan jösz?» Ha azt mondta a jámbor:
«Krimiából,» akkor azt kérdezte: «ettél-e altyinnát?» arra akár azt
mondta a góbé, hogy «ettem bizony,» akár azt, hogy «nem ettem,»
mindenképen kidobta a nyakánál fogva a kapun: mert a ki valaha akár
koldus, akár rabszolga volt Krimiában, annak tudnia kell azt, hogy az
altyinna a legkisebb tatár rézpénz, a mit alamizsnának osztogatnak.

E miatt elvádolta Apor István Boldizsár bát Ilka asszony előtt; hogy nem
ereszti a hirmondókat ő eléje. Ilka asszony ezért négy szem között
előfogta Czirjéket s zsémbelni kezdett vele.

– Mikor úgy hazudnak, mint a köles! A tizedik sem volt tatárrabságban;
hanem egytől hallott a többi valamit, azt azután tódítja tehetsége
szerint tíz más.

– De már ugyan mért akarnánk engem ezzel keseríteni?

– Hát ezt Están komám tudja jobban.

– Csak nem gondolja tán kegyelmed?

– De biz azt gondolom én, hogy ő uszítja te rád ezeket a Szentlázár
vitézeit, hogy tégedet jobban elijesztgessenek.

– De már ugyan miért tenné azt?

– Hát azt is kitalálom én. Úgy-e bár, hogy ő alkuszik a mi Tamásunk
váltságdíjára a tatár tihajával? Azt mondja: négy ezer aranyat követel a
murza, azon alúl ki nem adja az urunkat. Te neked pedig azzal a pénzzel
együtt, a mit az urad küldött én általam, alig van több készpénzed
kétezer aranynál. Most pedig, ez után az országos tatárdulás után, alig
lehet pénzt kapni egész Erdélyben: a kinél van is, a maga családjához
tartozók kiváltására szükséges neki. Tudom, hogy már a mi arany,
ezüst-marhád volt, mind Brassóba vándorolt a göröghöz: de még sem telik
ki a nagy váltságdíj. Kész volnál végtére még a mikóujvári uradalmat is,
várastul együtt zálogba adni, hogy az uradat kiszabadítsd; ha azon nem
aggódnál, hogy akkor meg a két kis fiadat rontod meg. Ezért rémítget
Están komám mindennap új meg új hirekkel, hogy állj rá minél elébb az ő
feltételeire, s az uradért cserébe add-oda a várad, az egész birtokod:
majd ő kerít rá pénzt.

– Hisz oda is adnám! mondá rá Ilka asszony.

– No úgy-e, hogy kivakkantottad a titkot, a mit súgtok-bugtok a tutor
urammal? Ezért az a nagy ijesztgetés. De hát én azt mondom, hogy ne
tedd. Beéri a tatár a kétezer arany váltságdíjjal, még kezet is csókol
neked érte. Ne hagyd magad agyonijeszteni. Nagy pénz az: kiadják érte
Damokos Tamást.

– De mikor én nekem rettenetes érzés az, hogy ő ott törje a fekete
csávában a bőrt az ő szép kezeivel! Minden nap, a mit neki ott kell
szenvedni, egy örökkévalóság én előttem.

– Hiszen ne vedd ám azt úgy, a hogy ezek a gyászvitézek hiresztelik. Én
is ismerem a cserző varga mesterségét: magam is tanultam. Igaz, hogy az
első munka nagy undorsággal jár: de arra csak a legaljasabb szolgákat
használják, a kik egyébhez nem tudnak. Ámde az olyan nagy eszű, irástudó
embert, a milyen Tamás öcsém, nem küldi a tatár cserző-csávába: hanem
beviszi a palotás műhelyébe, ott azt bízza rá, hogy a legfinomabb munkát
végezze ügyes kézzel. A mi Tamásunkat bizonynyal abban foglalkoztatják,
hogy ezeket a szép aranyos-ezüstös madarakat, tulipánokat festetik vele
a kész préselt bőrre, a miket itt a karos székeiden látsz; az pedig
kellemetes munka. Ő ért az irás mesterségéhez: vele iratják bizonynyal a
nevezetes mondásokat azokra a pánczél-bőrökre, a miket a tatár uraságok
hordanak. Mert ne ezekből a rongyos, szurtos tatárokból itéld meg ám a
krimi tatár nemzetet, a kiket mi itten faágyúval, cséphadaróval rakásra
öldösünk: ez csak a söpredéke. Otthon a tatár fényes, kérkedő úr,
duskálkodik a világi pompában. Aztán azt se hidd el ám senkinek, hogy az
egész Krimia egy olyan dögleletes pusztaság, a milyennek a kezdetén, a
záptengernél mutatkozik, a honnan a szökevények elillantak; belül
fölséges szép birodalom az: tele pompásnál pompásabb kertekkel,
erdőszámra vannak ott a gyümölcsfák, a miket mi csak aszaltgyümölcseik
után ismerünk. A mi Tamásunk pedig, tudod, hogy milyen nagy kertész
volt: akármi legyek, ha most ő ott nem a főkertésze a tatár murzának, s
míg mi itt a jégcsapokat bámuljuk az ereszen, ő most ott a virágos
kertben a jáczintokból, meg tulipánokból kötöz bokrétákat Buzdurgán uram
feleségeinek.

Ezzel a mondással még szinte hogy majdnem meg is nevetteté Boldizsár bá
a szegény kesergő asszonyt.

– Aztán még egyet teszek hozzá: mondá Czirjék. Azt is vedd fontolóra,
hogy Buzdurgán murza nagyon jól tudja ám, hogy Damokos Tamás főfő
székely ember, főkapitány, primor, kastélyos uraság. Ott van Kemény
János uram, a fővezér; az is megmondja neki, hogy ki az a Damokos Tamás?
Ő érte Buzdurgán uram kétezer aranycsikót kap. Hát csak van esze, hogy
elpusztulni ne engedje. Ne félj bizony, mikor ennek a többi szegény
rabnak szalmát sem adnak alomhoz valót, s a sótalan lóhúsra fogják őket,
a te uradat mandolával, meg mazsolaszőlővel hízlalják; s még a helyét is
megtörlik a murza feleségei, a hová leültetik. Úgy él az ott, mint a
paradicsomban, csak te hibázol neki, egyéb semmi.

Erre aztán sírt is, meg nevetett is egyszerre Ilka asszony.

– No látod, édes mézem, nem kell az embernek magát mindig a leggonoszabb
bajok képzeletével gyötörni. Aztán Isten is van a világon. Nem hagyja ő
el az inségben levőket.

Ilka asszony egészen megvigasztalódott erre a kecsegtetésre, és azt
mondá Boldizsár bának, hogy áldja meg ezért a jó szaváért az Isten.

– Hanem hát arra kérlek, hogy el ne mondd ám Están komámnak mindezeket,
a miket most neked elbeszéltem; mert az majd megint valami új furfangot
fundál ki. Hej, mert sok-fábul-faragott-ember ám az én komám. Te csak
mondd neki mindig azt, hogy itt van a kétezer arany: ennyi elég legyen,
többet nem tudsz előteremteni. Ha a tatár keményen tartja magát, vársz a
míg megszottyan.

Ilka asszony megigérte, hogy majd úgy tesz. Nem szól Apor Istvánnak
semmit. Pedig hát dehogy állhatta meg, hogy ne szóljon. A legelső
találkozásnál persze hogy elmondta előtte azt, a miben vigasztalását
találta.

Egyszer aztán megint csak kisírt szemünek találta Boldizsár bá Ilka
asszonyt.

– Hát már most megint ki törte el a mécses cserepet? Támadt rá
atyafiságos zsémbeléssel a hugára. Miért itattuk meg ismét az egereket?

Az csak húzódozott s felelt is, meg nem is: «hát csak van énnekem elég
okom, hogy sirással töltsem a napjaimat».

– Épen annyi, mint százezer özvegy asszonynak Erdélyországban, a ki mind
úgy van, a hogy te. Ha azok mind rákezdenék nap-naponta a sirást: uram
őrizz, felvenne bennünket az árvíz! De te neked még kevesebb okod van
annyival, hogy hírt hallasz az uradról.

– Hírt ám, szepegett az asszony: de milyen hírt?

– No hát milyent? Talán bizony hátul kötötték a sarkát?

– Kegyelmednek mindig tréfára áll a kedve!

– Hogyne állna? Mikor egész nap nekem muzsikálnak – a hátamon. De hát
ugyan mi rossz hírt hallottál Tamásról? Lánczra verték? Ütik verik?

– Azt nem teszik. Sőt inkább…

– Talán bizony ölelgetik, csókolgatják?

Az asszonynak megint olyan formára görbült a szája, mint a ki mindjárt
sirva akar fakadni.

– Mondtam úgy-e, hogy tovább ne add Están komámnak azt, a mit tőlem
hallottál? Most az már telebeszélte a füledet, az egész lelkedet azzal,
hogy hja bizony a Tamás szemre való legény: az bizony megtetszett a
murza feleségének; azóta össze is szőtték, boronálták a dolgukat; talán
még tatárul is megtanult a Tamás, s el is felejtette, hogy van felesége.
Ott lakik már benn a palotában, s kalamajkát tánczol, a tatár ifjasszony
meg timburán muzsikál hozzá; – úgy-e, hogy ezt mondta neked Apor István
uram?

– Nem! Nem ő mondta; hanem úgy álmodtam.

– Álmodtad ám: az Están komám szemeivel. No hát akár álmodtad, akár ő
tőle hallottad, ne hajts rá semmit. Álom: szófia beszéd! Hát ugyan olyan
embernek ismered te a te derék jó uradat? A ki hitvesi hűsége ellen még
akkor sem vétett, mikor a világ magas paripái ragadták magukkal; hát az
majd most fogja megtörni esküjét, mikor az Istennek ilyen sulyos
látogatása van rajta? Eredj már! Ne légy gyermek! Nézz bele a tükörbe,
aztán kérdezd meg magadtól, hogy elfeledhet-e valaki egy ilyen deli
magyar asszonyt? Aztán kiért? Egy tatár debelláért! Ha láttál volna
valaha egy tatár asszonyt, kinevetnéd magadat. Azzal a fekete pofával!
Az orruk ég felé áll, úgy hogy beleesik az eső: s a füleik akkorák, hogy
legyezhetik vele magukat, s szájuk meg olyan nagy, hogy saját maguknak a
fülébe sugdoshatnak vele; a fogaik feketére, a szemöldökeik kékre vannak
befestve; egy ilyen madárijesztő váztól félted az uradat, hogy elszereti
tőled. Inkább attól félthetnéd, hogy megeszi.

Nevetett, nevetett ezeken az asszony, meg is törlé szemeit a könyektől,
hogy hát jól van, nem gondol erre a bolondságra. De mégis csak komolyan
vette a dolgot.

– Mert hiszen, lássa kegyelmed; nem azért aggok én, hogy az én Tamásom
mást szeret, nem engem. Nem vagyok én olyan írígy. De attól reszket a
szivem, hogy ha azt a murza egyszer meg találja tudni, én édes Istenem,
még valami szörnyű csufondáros módon megcsonkíttatja szegény uramat.

– De verd ki az egész aggságot a fejedből. Add vissza annak, a kitől
kaptad. Ha álmodtad, álmodd vissza. Annak az én kedves komámnak, a
tutornak pedig mondd meg: hogy az Isten őrizze őt attól, hogy egyszer én
is ott legyek álmomban, mikor ő te neked álmodban ilyen hireket hord
haza, mert Isten úgy segéljen, olyat somodorintok a feje tarkójára –
álmomban, – hogy ébren is megtapogatja a helyét.

Ezt hát valahogy elütötte-vétette Boldizsár bá; de azért magának is
szeget ütött ez a fejébe. Mert nem igaz ám az, hogy azok a
tatár-asszonyok olyan csúfak volnának! Inkább nagyon is szépek.
Termetük, arczuk, hát még a szemeik! Veszedelem azoknak a villámlásába
kerülni. – Aztán húsból van az ember, még ha Damokos is. Az ilyen
dologban az asszonyok nagyon helyesen szoktak álmodni. Ébren sincs az
máskép. Az egész világtörténet egyetlen egy esetet tudott följegyezni a
férfiúi erényről: az is ki tudja igaz-e? Az a történet Potifárné és
József között azzal a köpönyeggel. Az egyik így adja elő, a másik amúgy.

Hogy melyik mondott igazat: az excellentiás asszony-e vagy a
zsidó-gyerek? ez a kérdés még nem volt biró előtt. (Ezeket Boldizsár bá
óggta-mógta így magában.)

Csak legjobb lesz siettetni a kiváltási ügyet, s e végett ő neki magának
felmenni Gyulafehérvárra a szultán tihajájához és siettetni az alkut;
mert a mit az asszonyok álmodnak, annak fele is igazság.




KALME.

Buzdurgán murzának a hires nevezetes telepe ott vala, a hol a Karaszu és
a Salgir folyamok egybeszakadnak s egy hegyes félszigetet képeznek. Maga
ez a telep egy egész kis város volt: mondhatni erősség; mert a két
folyam csupa zuhatagokban omlott alá a hegyek közűl, úgy, hogy a
vízsebesség miatt hajóval nem lehetett egyik partról a másikra átmenni,
de még a ki úszással akart is átjutni, számot vethetett a lelkével. A
száraz felől pedig erős kőfal vonult egyik partról a másikig, mely a
háromszöget bezárta.

A félsziget csúcsa az utolsó pontja volt egy lankás hegyláncznak,
oldalai szőlőkkel, gyümölcsfákkal beűltetve, a miknek koronái közül
messze kifehérlett a murza palotájának márványhomlokzata, a lapos
terrasseokkal, a mikben alkonyi órákban a háremét lehetett látni
mulatozni a távolból. Bizony csak távolból, mert a bőrgyár telepei lenn
voltak a parti lapályokon: azoknak vízhez közel kellett lenni, ott
voltak az erjesztő, posajtó medenczék. Az egész emberi lakcsoportozat
igazi tatárépítmény volt: rendetlen, egymást támogató házak, vakolatlan
falak, kiálló szarufák, nyers bőrrel, náddal, fakéreggel fedett kunyhók,
közben egy-egy sárgára, kékre, pirosra festett, hanem azért mindenütt
lyukas épület; hosszú szárnyékok, nyitott színek; semmi utcza, csak szűk
sikátorok, a mikben két öszvér ki nem kerülheti egymást; áthidaló
ereszek egyik sikátorból a másikba a háztetők felett; szárító
esztrengák, vörös téglafalu ablaktalan rakodók, sötét bolt-odúk: azok
előtt megint rudakra épített lombsátorok; szép lugasok, dögbőrökből; s
mindenütt sár, piszok, rondaság; fekete, sárga, veres, zöld rondaság;
bűz, büdösség, pestilentia a förtelem minden fokozatain keresztül: s
mindezekhez hozzáillő félmeztelen, piszkos, cseredzett, sovány,
elkényszeredett, vadállattá aljasult embertömeg; rabságra hurczolt
áldozatok minden körül lakó nemzet népeiből, a kikről régen
megfeledkeztek. Itten gyártják a marokint, meg a bagariát.

Hanem odafenn, a palota körül, valódi paradicsom van. Idáig nem hatol
fel sem a posajtók lugszaga, sem a rabszolgák jajveszéklése. A természet
maga alkotta édenné ezt a helyet, a midőn a magasabb hegyekről egy
hatalmas patakot irányzott a félszigetre, a mi aztán a magas előfokról
zuhatagban omlik alá a Karaszuba.

Fenn a várban kristályvizet isznak; lenn a városban cserző luggal,
trágyalével zavaros habarékot. Idelenn a csáva bűzölög, odafenn a
balzsamfák ambrája terjedez.

A hegylánczon túli része Krimiának egészen az olasz égalj áldásai alatt
virul. Épen úgy diszlenek a szabadban a babérfák, a gránátalmák, a
narancsok egész ligetszámra, mint Róma körül, s az olajfák ezüstszürke
örökzöldje között már otthonossá lettek a kis-ázsiai nemesített
gyümölcsök, körték, almák, baraczkok. Talán el is felejtette már a
világ, hogy ezek keletről jöttek a nyugati zord világba, s úgy terjedtek
tovább: úgy, hogy mikor már a székelyek a szilvából «ízet» főztek, akkor
még ennek a fáját Belgiumban, Angliában nem ismerték s a poroszoknál az
egyetlen érett gyümölcs volt a főtt körte.

Buzdurgán murza nem is volt semmire olyan büszke, mint a kertjére. A
nagy rablóhadjáratokból, a miket vezetett, zsákmányon és foglyokon kivül
még a kerti virágokat és ritka gyümölcsfákat is haza hordta s nagy
gondja volt rá, hogy megéledjenek; kertészeit a szultán Gökk Sü melletti
palotájában kitanult bosztandzsik közül szerezte s azoknak, mivelhogy
eunuchok voltak, szabad bejárásuk volt a palotájába s fizetést és
kaftánt kaptak. Az elhurczolt foglyok közül is kiválogatta a
legelőkelőbbeket, az értelmeseket, meg a kik tanítók voltak, s azokat
sorozta a kertben dolgozó rabszolgák közé. Az izoglán-basi azokat
dirigálta oktató szóval és – nogajkával.

Február végével, a mikor még a székely földön haragosan fujdogál végig
az öreg Nemere s rázza a havat a szakálláról, a krimi félszigeten már
teljes virágpompájukban állnak a gyümölcsfák s a talitarka virágágyak
csak ugy nevetnek a kinyilt jáczintoktól és tulipánoktól. A Tsatir-Dagh
magas hegyein megtörik az észak fagyos szele s a Fekete tenger felől
langy áramlat sietteti a tavaszt.

Hanem hát van az öreg Nemerének egy felesége, a Burána. Ez orosz
születésű. Ez még sokkal kegyetlenebb szél a másiknál. Megesik az
félszázadban egyszer, Olaszországban is, hogy az adriai tenger befagy s
ugyanakkor a tél köpönyege beteríti egész Nápolyig a délszaki
paradicsomot; az olasz, a ki először lát havat esni, azt hiszi, gyapot
hull az égből. Ilyenkor természetesen minden növényzet elfagy. Ez a rém
meglátogatja Krimiát is.

Mikor legszebben virágoznak a fák, csaknem nyári meleg van: egyszer csak
felülkerekedik a kopasz hegyormokon valami csunya, rongyosszélű
ólomszürke felleg s nagyhamar betakarja a ragyogó kék eget, olyan hegyes
esőt szitálva alá, hogy szinte szurja vele az embernek a bőrét. Ez így
tart három nap, három éjjel. Olyan hideg van, hogy bunda nélkül nem
lehet kilépni a szabadba. A bunda a tatároknál a thermométrum.

Buzdurgán murza mindennap háromszor bejárta az egész kertet, sorra
nézegetve a virágzó fáit, különösen sokat elidőzött az épen egész
pompájukban diszlő gránátalmák alatt s tanácsot tartott a kertészével;
de biz az sem tudott neki mást mondani, mint hogy ha a keringélő
dervisek naponkint háromszor végig nem tánczolják a kert minden útjait s
az imám négyszer a nap négy szakaszában el nem énekli a Koránból a
XXIII-ik szúrát, hát akkor nincsen segedelem. Ha estére ki talál
tisztulni az idő, éjszakára olyan dér lesz, hogy minden fűnek, fának
vége.

Pedig hát épen estére állt meg a kegyetlen hideg szél. Ugy szokta azt a
Burána asszony. Elvégezte a nagy szapulást, most aztán kitereget. Szép
«fogas verőfény» lett.

Az imámok üvöltöttek, a dervisek verték a csörgő dobokat; a kertész a
szakállát tépte; Buzdurgán murza pedig, mint egy őrült szaladgált a
kerti utakon alá s fel, hol az eget, hol a fákat nézve kétségbeesetten.

Egyszer egy rabszolga, a ki ott gereblyélt a virágágyak közt,
megszólítja:

– Kegyelmes uram, murza: nem használ ám semmit ez a könyörgés, a mit a
derviseid mivelnek; attól a fagy el nem mulik rólunk; hanem én tudnám
egy módját, a hogy mi szoktunk az ellen védekezni székelyek.

A murza végignézett rajta, s ráhorkantott boszusan.

– Hát te székely vagy? Mi a neved?

– Damokos Tamás.

– Damokos is, meg Tamás is? Melyik vagy hát?

– Mind a kettő. Székelyek főkapitánya vagyok.

– Héj ha azt tudom, nehezebb lánczot tetetek a kezedre, lábadra. Hát
aztán mit tudtok ti székelyek Allah haragja ellen, a kik még arra sem
vagytok érdemesek, hogy az árnyékába elbujjatok?

– Hát mi füstölni szoktunk ilyenkor.

– Hisz azt tudom bolond nélkül is. Olyan rakás tömjént gyujtaték meg a
serpenyőben, hogy az egész mosée tele van az illatával.

– De mi kinn a szabadban füstölünk a fák alatt, és nem tömjénnel, hanem
tőzeggel, nyers gazzal, a mi nehéz büzt ád: az veri el a fagyot. Engedd
meg nekem kegyelmes uram; hadd tegyek vele egy próbát.

– No hát tedd meg; adj rendeletet a többi rabszolgáknak, hogy segítsenek
neked ebben a székely istentiszteletben. Hanem annyit mondok neked
Damokos is, meg Tamás is: hogy ha engem lóvá tartasz s nekem hiába
büzölöd tele a kertemet meg a palotámat, s reggelre mégis elfagy minden:
hát akkor tégedet, a Damokost is, meg a Tamást is karóba huzatlak.

– Ott is ott leszek én. Felelt vissza a rabszolga.

– No hát kezdj hozzá a babonádhoz: megengedem.

Damokos Tamás azonnal összehordatta a tisztásokra a többi rabokkal a
nyers iszalagot, reketyét, s tüzet gyujtott alá. Mire a nehéz füst
elkezdett szétterjengeni s elülte az egész kertet. De egyuttal
beszüremkedett az a palota szobáiba is, s betölté keserű illattal még a
háremet is. Buzdurgán murza dult-fult, prüszkölt az orrtekerő illattól s
szidta a székelynek még a dédükeit is, a ki ezt támasztja; de kénytelen
volt eltürni, mert maga rendelte meg. Éjfél felé pedig Damokos Tamás jó
nyers cserhulladékot hordatott fel a gyárból, azt rakatta a tűzre.
Buzdurgán murza azt hitte, hogy a poklok kéménye nyilt meg: az füstöl az
orrába; pedig dehogy az nyilt meg: az még ezután következik. Végtére
afféle drágalátos bőrhulladék szemetet gyujtatott meg Tamás a kert
minden részében, a minek a kedveskedésétől Buzdurgán murza valamennyi
asszonynépével mind a pinczeboltokba menekült, s a muezzimnak odafenn a
minaréhban a torkába rekedt a «la illah il Allah!» Az egész kert
palotástól be volt burkolva a füstbe.

És aztán olyan hideg lett, hogy a szökőkut medenczéjében befagyott a
víz.

A mint kisütött a hajnali napsugár s Buzdurgán murza előjött a
pinczéből, az első dolga az volt, hogy felszaladt a palotája lapos
tetejére, széttekinteni a világban. Rémülve látta, hogy a tegnapi zöld
erdők mind szürkék-barnák köröskörül, s az udvaron levő szökőkut
medenczéje be van fagyva, a csövekről jégcsapok függnek alá. A szép
paradicsomkert maga pedig még most is sűrű füstbe van burkolva.

– Átkozott hitetlen kutya! ordítá Buzdurgán, féktelen dühében s szaladt
válogatni a korbácsaiban, melyikkel verje halálra a csalfa rabszolgát, a
ki egész éjjel így megkinozta a maga füstölésével őt és egész háza népét
s ehun ni! még jobban megharagítá vele Allaht! A míg azonban a korbácsai
közül megtalálta az igazit, az alatt keletkezett egy jó friss reggeli
szellő, az hirtelen elfujta a kertet elülő nehéz füstöt, s mikor
Buzdurgán murza lerohant a kertbe, ime eléje mosolyogtak a lángvirágú
gránátalmák, a tulipánok és jáczintok: nem pokolbűz, hanem millió eleven
virág füszerillata lengett a szellőben. A kert meg volt mentve: zöld
maradt minden falevél.

– Allahé a dicsőség! kiálta a murza elbámulva azon a nagy csodán, s
aztán maga elé hivatta Damokos Tamást.

– No te székely! látom bizony hogy a te isteni tiszteleted jó volt.
Büdös volt; de jó. Szidtalak egész éjjel, megdicsérlek nappal. És már
most, hogy megjutalmazzalak, háromféle kegyelmet teszek veled.

Damokos Tamás megörült, hogy ilyen nagy embertől valami kis kegyelem nem
jöhet.

– Először is elengedem neked azt a kétszáz korbácsot, a mit az éjjel
megfogadtam, hogy saját kezemmel rád verek. Másodszor levétetem a
lánczodat; ezentul láncz nélkül dolgozhatol a kertben. És harmadszor
minden napon kapsz egy egész kenyeret, nem a többi rabszolgák
moslékjából eszel.

Ennyi nagylelküség csak elég egy napra egy tatár murzától.

– No most már elmehetsz dolgodra. Hát te csakugyan Damokos is vagy, meg
Tamás is? Ej, ha azt tudtam volna, dupla váltságdijat kértem volna
érted. Feleséged is kettő van?

– De az csak egy van.

– Kár. Ha ketten volnának, könnyebben kiteremtenék érted azt a kétezer
aranyat.

– Kiteremti azt az az egy is, kegyelmes uram; légy felőle bizonyos; nem
hagy az itt engemet sokáig rabszolgaságban.

– Örülök, ha kivált; örülök, ha itt hágy, jó Damokos Tamás.

Ettől fogva aztán Tamásnak könnyebb volt az állapotja az ő rabságában: a
kertészkedést otthon is nagy kedvvel szokta gyakorolni.

Mondtuk már, hogy Buzdurgán murza bőrrel kereskedett. Állatok bőrével
is, meg emberek bőrével is. Nagykereskedő volt mind a két szakmában; azt
is mondhatjuk, hogy nagyiparos. A marokinját, szattyánját, bagariáját
elhordták messze földre a kalmárok s kereskedtek vele. Az eleven bőr
ellenben nem került nála vásárra. Ő azt sokkal gyakorlatibb uton tudta
értékesíteni. Maga is egyik előkelő vezér lévén, a ki alatt kilencz orta
állt, valahányszor egy hadjáratból haza került s rendesen egész sereg
foglyot hozott magával, azokat legelőször is szakértő módon osztályozta.
A tenyereiket nézte: a melyiké fel volt törve, az paraszt, földmives,
nem sok váltságdij néz ki belőle, ez mehet a bőrgyárba dolgozni; a
melyiknek a tenyere sima, ez urféle, ezért váltságdijat fognak adni,
ennek az életét meg kell őrizni. Az öltözet nem tehetett náluk
különbséget, mert az uri köntöst már az elfogáskor lehuzta róluk a tatár
s rongyos daróczot dobott a nyakukba helyette, úgy, hogy mind egyformák
voltak. Leány vagy asszonyféléből csak azt hozta el, a mi nagyon szép és
fiatal volt. Azt azután megtartotta magának feleségül. Volt az neki sok.
Ugy volt vele, mint a kutya a szénával. Ezeket nem engedte kiváltani.

A kedvenczhölgy volt Kalme a kadina: cserkesznő, a tsetsencz fajból,
mely a török padisahk szerályának szokta a legtöbb csillagát
kölcsönözni. Ezt onnan rabolta el a Kaukazusból, mikor hajórajjal mentek
át a tengeren a murtizigátorok ellen. A szép Kalme olyan úr volt
Buzdurgán murza fölött, mint a murza a többi rabszolgái fölött.

Forró délutáni órákban le szokott jönni Kalme a palotából a többi
háremhölgyekkel a kertbe sétálni és mulatozni, mielőtt azonban
kijönnének, elébb trombitaszó adott jelt a kertben dolgozó férfiaknak,
hogy siessenek a fallal körülkerített rekesztéken kívül eltünni, s a
harmadik trombitaszó után fekete eunuchok jöttek elő, rhinoczeroszbőr
korbácsokkal, végig szaladgálva a kerti utakat, s sorra kutatva minden
bokrot, de még a terebélyfák lombos koronáit is, hogy nem maradt-e ott
valami kanember? Jaj lett volna annak!

Egy délután Damokos Tamásnak azt a munkát adta a főkertész, hogy a nagy
vízmedencze körül levő virágágyakból szedje ki az elvirított
tulipánhagymákat s azok helyébe későbbi virításra szánt tubarózsákat
ültessen. Tamás elvégezte mind a kettőt nagyhamar; mivelhogy az
urfélének az a szokása, hogy ha egyszer parasztmunkába fog, azt nagy
sietve elvégzi; nem tempózik vele, mint az igazi napszámos; egy nagy
kosár megtelt kiszedett tulipánhagymával, a másik kasból meg kiürültek a
tubarózsák. Ekkor aztán a fáradságtól, meg a hőségtől úgy elnyomta a
buzgóság, hogy biz ő ott elaludt. A főkertész, a ki visszajött, megnézni
a dolgát, látta, hogy már el is van végezve s az ő szolgája alszik:
megszánta szegényt, jó szive volt, fogta az üres kast, letakarta vele,
hogy ne süsse a verőfény, s ne csipjék a legyek: a mitől az aztán még
mélyebben aludta az igazak álmát.

Egyszer aztán harsog a trombita; a feketék jönnek nagy riogatással,
végig toporzékolva a tévutakon, s kergetik a férfi-népet ki a kertből,
felkutatják a bokrokat, a filagoriás kösköket: nem bujt-e oda valaki?
Látták biz azok ott a virágágyak között azt a két kast; az egyiket tele
hagymával, a másikat fenékkel felfordítva; de eszük ágában sem volt,
hogy még azt is megvizsgálják.

A jó Damokos Tamás pedig csak aludt szép nyugodt lélekkel a lefordított
kas alatt s eszébe sem jött, hogy a trombita szóra és lábdobogásra
felneszeljen; mert ő épen most hazatérőben volt Mikóujvárára mind
hadseregestül: annak a trombitái szóltak, annak a lovai dobogtak úgy.
Diadalmasan tért haza a megvivott harczból. Szó sincs róla, hogy őt
elfogták volna; sőt inkább harczi trophæumokkal, tatár-lengyel
exuviákkal megterhelve tér haza népestől. A várának a tornyai
megaranyozódtak az alatt, hogy odajárt, úgy ragyognak. A két fia eléje
jön lóháton: hej, hogy megnőttek azóta. Félinges kis babákul hagyta őket
otthon, s egész legényekül jönnek most eléje; mégis rájuk ismer. No van
csókolódás! Hát anyátok hol van? Felelnek valamit: de nem érti.
Elszokott a füle attól a beszédtől, a mit Erdélyben beszélnek.

A szerály felőli rácsozatos kertajtó megnyilik, s a rózsalugassal fedett
lépcsőgádoron át leszállnak a palota hölgyei. Egész dandár azoknak a
száma. Nem mind ikbál, a nagyobbrész odaliszk, a ki az urnője arczát
ernyővel védi a nap ellen, pávafark-legyezővel hüsseli, mandolint,
hárfát hoz, vagy csengős nakarát, a mi tánczhoz való. Napkelet minden
festői divatja szerint van öltözve valamennyi, a hány annyiféleképen.
Azt, hogy ki közöttük a kadina, a legelső urnő, ha a szolgálattevő
hódolat nem árulná is el, ha a ragyogó ékszerek nem kérkednének is vele,
hirdetné maga az arcza, a termete. «Mikor te kilépsz a házadból, a nap
eltakarja az arczát felhővel, azt mondva: most világíts te helyettem!»
így zengedezne róla valami keleti költő. Mi azonban nyugodjunk meg
abban, hogy Kalme legszebb volt a tizenkét hölgy között.

Eleinte fel s alá sétálgattak a tekervényes tévutakon, virágokat
szedtek, koszorukat fontak, éretlen gyümölcsökbe beletorkoskodtak,
pillangókat kergettek; azután énekelni, tánczolni kezdtek; majd karéjban
összefogózva, majd párosával, fátyolkendőt tartva a fejük felett, egynek
kedve kerekedett szilaj magántánczot járni leterített szőnyegen, s míg a
csörgős dobot ütögette a feje fölé emelt kezeivel, az alatt a többi
odaliszkok zümmögő dalt dudoltak félkaréjban állva. Kalme, két
hölgytársa vállaira dülve gyönyörködött bennük.

Damokos Tamás pedig ottan a kas alatt látá, hogy vonulnak ki eléje
Csik-Szereda ifjú hölgyei nagy zsolozsmaénekléssel. Danolnak is,
tánczolnak is. No lelkecskéim, énekeljétek azt a zsoltárt, hogy «A
Sionnak hegyén Ur Isten, Tiéd a dicséret!» Éneklik is, de valami olyan
furcsa nótára, a milyet ő soha életében nem hallott. Nem illik ez a
melodia sehogy a textushoz. Aztán nem kellene az embernek tánczolni a
zsoltárhoz.

A táncz után sorbetet, meg szultánkenyeret s egyéb csemegéket hoztak; a
hölgyek letelepedtek a nagy persa szőnyegre, a mit a pázsitra terítének,
s akkor elkezdett egy török hölgy meséket mondani, a mik fölött
egyszer-egyszer valamenyi felkaczagott. Elhiszem azt, hogy mikor egy
pogány isten egy csoportban ennyi kaczagó női ajkot látott megnyilni,
hát azt mondta, hogy «de bizony szebb a földön, mint az égben.»

Mikor aztán a nap kezdett aláhanyatlani, s a nagy olajfák, cziprusok
árnyéka betakarta a kertet, a fülemülék megszólaltak köröskörül, akkor a
kadina megkivánta a fürdést. A nagy medenczében a szökőkut sugara olyan
dallamos hangokon fecsegett a naptól átlangyult habokkal, hogy
lehetetlen volt a hivogatásnak ellene állani. A hölgyek valamennyien
mind lerakták lepleiket, s aztán csintalan játékot üzve, kergetölőztek a
nagy medenczében; maga a bűbájos Kalme, mint egy élő márványszobor oda
állt a szökőkút sugara mellé, s karját feje fölé emelve, engedé a
kristálygyöngyöket vállain végig peregni.

Halandó szeme nem láthatta ezt a képet: az istenek pedig hadd lássák! és
irigykedjenek.

«No micsoda bolond ez már megint!» mondá Damokos Tamás. Ne sikoltozzatok
annyit a lovam körül, mert még lefordulok róla. Ne nyulj hozzá te
menyecske, mert megrug! Egyszer csak felugrott a lova, s ő keresztül
esett a fején. Szerencsére csak a kosár oldalába ütötte a homlokát.
Aztán nagyon elbámult, hogy olyan szűk lett egyszerre a láthatár.
Kereste Mikóujvárát: az már nem volt ott; hanem a menyecskék sikoltozása
folyvást hallható volt most is.

Már csak még sem állhatta meg, hogy a kasnak a fonadékán ki ne
tekintsen, hogy mi lett a lovával, a melyikről leesett? S akkor
egyszerre előtte állt az a látvány, a mi csak az olympi isteneknek való.
Észbontó, szívbetegítő látvány. A hol az üdvösség és az elkárhozás
összetalálkozik. Az örvénynyé vált mézcsepp!

A mythoszi regét látta maga előtt, Anadyomene születéséről, a mint a
nereidák vállaikra emelik a tajtékból született Dionét, hogy hosszu,
aranyba játszó hajfürteit, a mik lebontva végig omlanak az élő
márványon, illatos olajjal bekenjék. Egyik nimfa a tenyerével befogta a
szökőkút csövét s az elszorított víz sűrű permetegekben lövell szét a
tenyere alól a csoportozat feje fölött, a mire, a mint a pálmafák közül
kilövellő rózsaszin alkonysugár rásüt, félkerek szivárvány tündérkerete
támad körülötte, maga a medencze vize a szétterülő olajtól
gyöngyházszinben játszik. Kép csupa ragyogásból, fényre festett fény, a
minek közepette csak a szökőkutat elfojtó bizbariba néger rabnő jaspis
szobor alakja fekete. A vidám, csintalan női kaczaj s a fülemüle
csattogás egymásba vegyül: közbe egy-egy hárfahur pendül s a megzavart
víz habja locscsan, dallamos lubiczkolással.

– Ne lássam ezt az álmot! sóhajtá erényes elborzadással Tamás. Soha sem
vitte őt arra a lelke, hogy asszonyok után leskelődjék. Sybaritának,
mohamedhivő töröknek való ez. «Nem akarom látni! Más álmot akarok
látni!» S hogy annál biztosabb legyen magáról, a két kezével eltakarta a
szemeit és hanyatt feküdt s aztán csak a fülei hallották még a dévaj
kaczagást, a csalogány czuppogását, a habok locscsanását. Rá tudta magát
kényszeríteni, hogy ujra elaludjék. Kevés ember tette volna ezt meg az ő
helyén.

Ámde az ébren látott tünemények az álom országába is utána találtak: ha
elfutott előlük, eléje kerültek. Pedig olyan jól elbujtatta magát: egy
nagy kőkoporsó födele alá. Itt csak nem lelnek rá. A dal, a kaczagás
hangja ugyan ide is lehatol hozzá; de legalább sötétségben van.

Csakhogy egyszerre az a kőkoporsó elkezd átlátszóvá lenni; kristálylyá
lesz a födele, keresztül láthatni rajta. Most látja már, hogy hová
jutott? ott van a török szultán szeráljában, annak a legbelső háremében:
a fehér márvány fürdőteremben, a minek a falai arany betűs
alkoránmondásokkal vannak teleírva.

Egész serege zsibong ott a háremhölgyeknek: tánczolnak, dalolnak, vízben
lubiczkolnak, hintán himbálódnak, hegedülnek és tamburáznak, egymást
narancsokkal hajigálják.

A világ mindenféle szinű hölgyei vannak ott, fehérek, feketék, sárgák,
olajbarnák, aranyozott és karmazsinra festett szemöldöküek, kék, fekete
és zöld szemekkel, selyemsárga, sáfránveres és koromfekete hajzattal.
Valamennyien mind tudják, hogy ő ott van, egy férfi, lezárva
kristálykoporsóba. Körültánczolják nevetve, gúnyolódva; kinálják
csemegékkel, gyümölcsökkel, habzó serlegekkel, még ajkaik mézével is:
tudják, hogy nem nyulhat hozzá, nehéz ez a koporsófödél. Csak azért
ingerkednek vele, hogy a tehetetlen kínlódásában gyönyörködjenek.

– Pokol tüze emészszen meg benneteket! mormogá magában az álomlátó.

– Tüzet kivántál? Ha csak ez kell, az is meglesz.

Nagy hirtelen oda hoznak eléje egy roppant nagy medenczét, aranyozott
vörös rézből, a min virágok vannak kiverve kék ezüstből, fehér aranyból.
Ez a medencze tele van parázszsal. Odahelyezik a kristálykoporsó mellé:
olyan közel, hogy a kisugárzó meleg süti az orczáját.

– No már most mi lészen ebből? dörmögi a fogai közt.

Az üstre valami tömjénformát hintenek, a miből egyszerre nagy fehér füst
támad, a mi eltakar mindent.

– No ezt jobban is szeretem, mondja magában.

De a füst nem soká tart, nagy zsivaj támad: «jön az aszszeki szultána! A
padisah kedvencz kadinája!»

A füst kétfelé vonul, mint egy kárpit.

Most száll le a szultána a negyven márvány lépcsőn a nagy fürdőtükörbe,
melybe két óriási márványoroszlán okádja a vizet.

– Vakulj meg két szemem! nyögi az álomlátó. Mert nem elég, hogy látnia
kell az eléje szálló alakot, hanem még rá is kell ismernie. Az ő
felesége ez, az ő Ilkája! Nem! Csak volt az övé, most már a szultáné,
pogány török császárnak a rabfelesége.

Óh mi irtózat ezt látni! Azért hozták ide őt ebben a kristálykoporsóban,
hogy ezt meglássa. Pokollá akarták tenni az életét. Csak legalább ne
mosolyogna ez a nő! Ne mutatná ragyogó orczáján, hogy szépsége vásárra
bocsátásában diadalát találja. Pedig hiszen ő az! Nincs másnak ilyen
arcza! Csak legalább arczát takarnátok el! Dobjatok rá valami fátyolt.

S az álmodónak csak kivánni kell, mindjárt beteljesül.

A rabnők előhoznak egy kis szelenczét, abban van egy arany fátyol. Az
egész nem nyom talán többet egy aranynál.

Egy nehezék arany olyan finommá ellapítva, hogy egy egész emberalakot
képes tetőtől talpig eltakarni, mint egy palást.

De ez a finom, vékony aranylepel úgy odatapad minden tagjához, mintha
semmi sem volna rajta, még az arczvonásai is mind oly hiven kitünnek
alóla: az maradt a ki volt; csak egy élő aranybálvány lett belőle, a ki
mozdul és jár.

S hogy még feszesebben álljon rajta az aranypihe: a derekára övet
körítenek.

De nem is őv az, hanem egy olvasó, csat helyett a közepén a feszület van
rajta.

– Távozz tőlem sátán!

Ez meg épen hivogatás volt. Az aranyozott túlvilági alak ismerős
mosolylyal jön hozzá közelebb s meg nem állhatja, hogy mikor őt meglátja
ebben a zárkában, fel ne kaczagjon rajta. A kaczagástól szétreped az
arczán az aranyfüstlemez s most már egész mivoltában látja őt maga
előtt.

Az ő Ilkája az, nem más.

Ha most megölhetné! Csak ez az egy vágya.

A fantóm leveszi derekáról az olvasót. Tán imádkozni fog, keresztyén
módra?

Dehogy azt cselekszi! Sőt inkább letépi az olvasóról az egyes szemeit a
rózsafüzérnek s aztán szemenkint belehajigálja a parázszsal telt
füstölőbe s a fejével bólint hozzá: «Ez a miatyánk! Ez a hiszekegy! Ez
az Ave Mária!» s aztán tovább megint szemenkint: hiszekegy! úr imája!
üdvözlégy!

A tűzbehajított golyócskák izzóvá lesznek ott, s mint megannyi haragvó
angyal szeme, úgy sugárzanak a szentségtörő arczába, a ki egyre nevet és
bólintgat.

Az álomlátó szeretné ledobni magáról azt az átlátszó koporsó-fedelet, s
aztán beletemetni abba a tűzbe azt a bűbájos vétkezőt, a ki minden
mozdulatával, de minden szempillantásával őt öli meg ugyanannyiszor.
Hanem hát a koporsó födele olyan nehéz, hogy azt egy Toldi Miklós sem
tudná ledobni, az ő kezei pedig olyan gyöngék, hogy csak egy kosár
födelét sem birnák fölemelni.

Az a sok rabnő, milyen dévajul kaczag ott köröskörül!

Az utolsó szem is lepergett már az olvasóról: csak a feszület maga
maradt még meg a zsinóron. A csábalak most azt is odaveti a tűz közé.

A zsarátnakon izzó felfeszített alak a halálkinoktól látszott vonaglani;
Damokos Tamás a megváltónak minden végmondását hallani véli, mik a
keresztfán haldokló ajkairól aláhangzottak; düh és keserüség szállja meg
idegeit; izmait, inait emberfölötti erőkitörésre feszíti; sikerül
ledobni magáról a nehéz koporsó födelet, s azzal odaugrik a
rézmedenczéhez, a parázstól izzóhoz, az olvasó gyöngyöktől ragyogóhoz s
felragadva azt két sámsoni öklébe, a fogantyúnál fogva, odazúdítja: – –
igen is az egész nagy kosár tulipánhagymát Kálme asszonyság és
lubiczkoló rabnőinek a nyaka közé…

A fürdő hölgyek e tulipántos felköszöntésre, de még inkább az égből
cseppent férfinak a látására iszonyú sikoltozásnak eredtek, s nosza
rejtegették az arczaikat a tenyereikbe. Csak Kalme nem takargatta a
képét szeméremrejtő kézzel, hadd égjen azon a haragnak lángja teljes
lobogásában!

– Fogjátok meg a vakmerőt és korbácsoljátok halálra! kiálta istennői
durczával, félig befont hajtekercsét ökölre szoritva, mintha az is
korbács volna. Mire a rabnők csoportja nagy sivalkodással rohant rá
Tamásra minden oldalról.

Az pedig csak állt ott, mint Lót felesége, sóbálvány korában, elámulva s
azt sem tudva, égen jár-e, vagy a földön? Vajjon ez is álomlátás-e még?

A dévaj mænadsereg körülfogta, üstökébe kapaszkodtak, karjait hátra
csavarták, s ő csak állta mindezt csendesen, mint a megbénult, a ki se
kezének, se lábának nem tudja hasznát venni. Azt is eltűrte, hogy az
egyik hölgy hajából kitépett selyemszalaggal a hátrafacsart ökleit
egymáshoz kötözze. Hanem a mint az a feketebőrü leánycseléd egy
irgalmatlan nagy bőrkorbácscsal reá rohant, egyszerre visszatért a
szivébe a lélek; nagyott sikoltott, szétszakítá az öklére tekert
selyemszalagot, s azzal hirtelen nyalábra kapta a fekete rabszolgálót,
mint egy gyermeket s a fejét a hóna alá fogva, annak a lábszáraival,
mint két cséphadaróval, úgy szétverte az egész rátámadó asszonynépet,
hogy mind elfutott az a bokorba; végre pedig a verekedő eszközül
használt szerecsennőt visszadobta a vízmedenczébe, s akkor aztán oda
állt annak a szélére s kevélyen kifeszitve széles mellét s megrázva
büszkén felemelt fejét, így szólt a kadinához:

– Én nem vagyok gyáva rabszolga czenk; hanem igazi magyar nemes! Hivass
ellenem férfiakat, hozzanak kardokat, vágjanak darabokra; de az én
testemet korbácsütés nem éri, amíg élek!

A kadina elbámult a merész szavakon; ez a délczeg alak megigézte.
Visszaemlékezteté azokra az őshonában lakó vitéz murtizigátorokra; akik
közül soha még ellenség foglyul egyet sem ejthetett, mert mindegyiknek
ott van az öve mellett a görbe kés, a minek a sarlóéle arra való, hogy
ha nincs menekülése a hősnek, maga vágja el a nyakát. Ezek voltak az ő
rokonai.

– Hagyjátok őt! parancsolá a hölgyeknek. Ne hívjátok az őröket. Magunk
tartunk törvényt fölötte. Azt mondja, vitéz volt: megérdemli, hogy kard
által haljon meg. Te, vakmerő férfi, most lépj be oda, abba a köskbe és
várd el további sorsodat.

Tamás megfordult s bement a czifra nyári lakba, anélkül, hogy csak
egyszer is visszafordította volna még a fejét.

Kevés idő vártatva utána jöttek az asszonyok; felöltözve és arczaik
lefátyolozva.

Kalme maga felült a kösk közepén levő diványra; a többi hölgyek
félkörben letelepedtek körülötte a puha szőnyegekre.

– Jőjj ide és beszéld el életed történetét; parancsolá Kalme Damokos
Tamásnak.

A délczeg ifjú a rabszolga köntösben is daliás alak volt, s a nyomort is
megaranyozza a büszke férfitekintet. A nők szeme mind rajta függött; de
a ki leginkább el nem ereszté egy pillanatig is tekintete elől, az Kalme
volt.

Mikor hazájáról s annak szabad népeiről beszélt Damokos Tamás, az
asszonyokról, a kik a férfiakkal egy becsületben vannak, arról a titkos
érzésről, a mi a magyar föld lakóját hazájához vonzza: hát akkor egy-egy
elfojthatatlan sóhajtás támadt szavaira, és mikor leírta fogságra
jutását, sok szenvedéseit, bizony könybe lábadt az asszonyok szeme: de
valamennyié.

Még a büszke kadina is tenyerébe hajtá fejét, olyan nehéz lett az
azoktól a regéktől, miket a rab vitéztől hallott.

– Megértők sorsodat; kimehetsz előlünk. Várd el az itéletedet.

Tamás elhagyta a kösköt, s aztán hozzálátott, hogy legelébb is azt a
kárt helyrehozza, a mit bolond fővel a kertésznek tett. Kihalászta a
tulipánhagymákat a vízből s gereblyével szépen elegyengette a dulakodás
nyomait a virágágyak között: mire Kalme és asszonyai előjöttek a
köskből, már helyre volt hozva minden kártétel.

– Hallgasd meg itéletedet: mondá Kalme kegyesen. Életedet meghagyjuk,
sőt kemény sorsodat enyhíteni akarjuk. Tudd meg, miképen?

Kalme e szavaknál olyan közel lépett Tamáshoz, hogy a vékony aranyos
fátyolon keresztül a forró lélekzete érte az arczát. Suttogva beszélt
hozzája. Azonban Tamás minden szavára kemény, jól hallható hangon
válaszolt, miszerint mindenki tudhassa, hogy ő igazjáratbeli ember.

– Te azt mondád, szólt Kalme, hogy minden iskolát kijárt, tanult, tudós
ember vagy? Tehát írni is tudsz?

– Igenis, hogy tudok.

– Úgy van az az én hazámban is. A férfiakat mind megtanítják betüket
írni: de a lányokat csak a betüket elolvasni. Azért én eltudom olvasni a
mčhdruli írást: de leírni nem tudom.

– Akkor mégis többet tudsz, mint én, mert én tudok ugyan írni és olvasni
magyarul, meg diákul, egy kicsit görögül is; a góth betükhöz is konyítok
valamelyest; de a mčhdruli írásnak soha hírét sem hallottam, azt se
írni, se olvasni nem tudom: mert azt az én hazámban nem ismerik.

– Ha olvasni nem tudod, az nem baj. De hogyha kezed járatos a toll, vagy
a nád, vagy a karczoló tű, vagy az ecset forgatásában, úgy bizonyára
egyik betüt a másikról le tudja másolni, ha eléd teszik.

– Az már meglehet. Azt mondom rá az egyszeri székelylyel: «még nem
próbáltam, hogy tudok-e hegedülni? de meglehet, hogy tudok».

– Hát példaképen tekints ide. Kalme lecsatolta karcsu derekáról a
karmazsinpiros marokin bőrövet, melyre domboru rajzokban mindenféle
kacskaringók voltak aranyfestéssel formálva.

– Látod: ez a mčhdruli írás. Ez egy mondat az alkoránból.

Annak a mčhdruli írásnak (a mi a cserkeszeknél a nemzeti kalligrafia)
betüi semmihez sem hasonlítanak olyan nagyon, mint azokhoz a
zsinorkacskaringókhoz, a mik a magyar dolmányra elül-hátul felvarrva
láthatók. Meglehet, hogy ha egy ilyen zsinóros magyar a cserkeszek közé
tévedne, ezek annak a dolmányáról csodadolgokat tudnának leolvasni.
Azért ezek az írásjegyek pompásan diszítik a préselt marokint, sokkal
inkább, mint az arab, vagy akár a török talik írás betüi, vagy a tatárok
szarkalábjai és az örmények szerteszétágazó ákombákjai.

– Le tudnád-e ezt erről az övről írni?

Damokos Tamás vállat vont. E bizony nem szentírás.

– Ha rávetném a fejemet, miért nem?

– No hát tartsd ezt az ővet most magadnál, s rejtsd el egy múza-pálma
fiatal hajtásának a közepébe. Mikor aztán holdvilág lesz, vagy pedig
pitymallatkor, a midőn még mindenki alszik, vedd elő, s ezzel a hegyes
késsel karczold fel ezeket a betüket, jobbról balra kezdve, ennek a
kösknek a falára. A fal veres, a karcz fehér lesz, elolvasható. Holnap
reggel lejön a murza ide, az abdesztán mosakodást végezni. Meglátja ezt
a felkarczolt irást itt a falon. Közel légy akkor. A murza fel fog
kiáltani: «Ki karczolta ezt az írást ide erre a falra?» Te akkor lépj
elő bátran és mondd meg neki: «én karczoltam azt oda!» A többit azután
várd be csendesen. Meglátod, hogy mi történik? Ha van bátorságod hozzá,
megteszed; ha nincs, abba hagyod. Ha mersz a sorsoddal megküzdeni,
kiállhatsz; ha nem mersz, elbujhatsz. Én nem árulom el senkinek, ami itt
történt. Hogy biztosságban légy, neked adom ezt a kis görbe késemet.
Ilyent hordanak az én bátyáim maguknál, hogy a rabszolgaságtól magukat
megóvják. Most pedig rejtsd el magad oda, ahonnan előjöttél.

Kalme ott hagyta Tamást a cziprusbokroktól rejtve s hölgyeivel együtt
visszavonult a palotába, énekszó, lant, koboz elhangzott. Tamás
visszafeküdt a kas alá s bevárta csendesen, míg az eunuchok őrjárata
előjött, kinyitogatni a kertajtókat, hogy a kertészek, bosztandsik és
izoglánok újra bejöhessenek. Mikor a bosztandsi basi előkerült, már ott
találta a virágágyak között Tamást, gereblyézve.

– Csak látszik, hogy legszorgalmasabb valamennyi között az én Tamás
szolgám.

Másnap kora hajnalban lejött a murza az abdesztán mosakodást végezni a
kerti köskbe.

Tamás ott kapargatta a körtefák derekáról a tarjagot, s vizsga
figyelemmel nézte a murza orczáját.

Hiszen tanulmányozásra méltó pofa is volt az: széles és lapos, nagy,
kiülő ökörszemekkel, a mik egymáshoz igen közel állottak, a közbeeső orr
azonban olyan pisze volt, hogy annál fogva ugyan nem lehetett volna őt
vezetni. Ennélfogva aztán a szájának sokkal több hely jutott, mint a
mennyi a szépségre megkivántatik, s hozzájárult még az a hiányosság,
hogy a széles ajkon alig berzengett itt-amott öt hat szál bajusz, mint a
kandurnál.

Azután, ahogy minden ilyen óriásnál szokott lenni, az érző idegei olyan
lomhák voltak, hogy amíg a szemeivel valamit meglátott, nagy idő telt
bele, hogy az arra támadt érzés az arczvonásaiban kifejezze magát, s az
is olyan finta kifejezés lett, hogy a ránézőnek nehéz volt kitalálni,
vajjon haragjában agyarkodik-e az most, vagy örömében vigyorog?

– Ki karczolta ezt ide a falra? ordítá Buzdurgán az ott kapargáló
Tamásra, amint elébb a szemeivel megbámulta apróra a kacskaringós
cserkesz írást, s aztán széthuzta a száját, fogait kivicsorítva (ki
tudja, mosolygás-e ez nála, vagy emberevési szándék?)

Tamásnak bizony megrezzent az ina erre az ordításra.

– No csak ne szepegj! mondá neki Buzdurgán. Hiszen csak suttogtam most!
Mászsz közelebb! Ki írta ezt ide a falra?

S a szemei keresztbe álltak, s a fogai csattogtak hozzá.

S hogy a rabszolga nem sietett elég gyorsan, kinyujtá eléje hosszú kezét
s megfogta az orrát, annálfogva húzta közelebb.

– Milyen nagy orra van a czudarnak! Olyan mint egy vaddisznónak az orra.

Buzdurgánnak elég oka volt, hogy irigy legyen rá.

– No hát beleverjem az orrodat ebbe az írásba? Látod? vagy nem látod? Ki
írta ezt ide?

Tamásnak eszébe jutott a kadina mondása: «ha van bátorságod, megteszed».
De hát hogy ne volna.

Már is magasra emelte az orrát.

– Én írtam azt oda.

Erre a szóra Buzdurgán a két térdére tette a két tenyerét, így görbíté
alá a hátát, hogy a nagy pofájával egyenesen szembe nézhesse Damokos
Tamást.

– Te írtad ezt? Te magad? Nem hazudsz? Hát le tudnád ezt még egyszer
írni?

– Le biz én.

Azzal Tamás fogta a kaparó-vasát s annak a hegyével rendén leírta az
egész sort az út porondjába. Éleseszű volt: bár nem is értette a mčhdrul
írást, amit egyszer leírt, azt el nem felejtette.

Erre Buzdurgán murza akkorára feltátotta a két sor fogát, olyat ordított
mellé, s úgy terjeszté ki a két karját, hogy Damokos Tamás most már
csakugyan azt hitte, hogy meg akarja őt enni.

Ő pedig, a milyen gyors volt, mint a párducz, hátraszökkent, s kirántva
kebléből azt a görbe kést, marokra fogta azt, s azt mondá a murzának:

– Meg ne gyalázz! mert elébb ezzel a késsel elvágom a torkomat.

Buzdurgán előbb megbámulta a görbe kést, s miután meggyőződött róla,
hogy az csakugyan görbe kés, egyszerre rémületre hosszabbodott arczczal
kiáltá, reszketőssé vált hangon Tamásra:

– Jaj fiam! el ne vágd a nyakadat azzal a késsel! Nem akartalak én
bántani: csak meg akartalak ölelni. Ne félj tőlem, édeském, fiacskám.
Kaftánt adok, salavárit adok, selyembe takargatlak, lépes mézzel
etetlek, csak el ne öld magadat. Fiammá fogadlak, gyaloghintóban
járatlak: olyan jó dolgod lesz nálam, hogy az édes anyádnál sem volt
jobb. Ne bolondozz azzal a bicsakkal.

– No hát! mondá Tamás daczosan; mit akarsz hát velem?

– Megmondom egy szóval. Valamennyi rabszolgám közt legelsővé teszlek. Te
parancsolsz valamennyinek, teneked meg senki. Akkor dolgozol, a mikor
akarsz. Mindent tehetsz, csak el nem szökhetsz. Kapsz tőlem külön házat,
a miben lakhatol; a hányszor ebédelni akarsz, csak küldj a szakácshoz!
mit iszol? hozasd! Ha feleségre van szükséged, csak annyit mondj, hány
kell? Még fizetést is adok, s azt, ha akarod, haza küldheted az
atyádfiainak. Olyan jó dolgod lesz nálam, hogy soha többet a rongyos
pereputtyaidhoz vissza nem kivánkozol.

– De hát most mégis szeretném tudni, hogy mivel szolgáltam én rá erre a
nagy dicsőségre?

– Megérted fiam azonnal: csak nyisd ki a füledet és csukd be a
bicsakodat. Ülj le ide mellém a fübe. Vigyázz, hogy meg ne csipjen a
hangya. Hát azt tudod úgy-e, hogy én nekem van a leghiresebb bőrgyáram a
világon. Az én bivalybőrömből készitik a pánczélokat, az én marokinomat
viszik fejedelmi palotákba a frankok és egyéb gyaurok birodalmaiba, a
kik lábas székeken ülnek, s a könyveiket beköttetik, épen úgy, mint az
igazhivők templomaiba, a hol azokat szőnyegek gyanánt leterítik; az én
korbácsaim osztják az igazságot a jeges tengertől elkezdve a
Verestengerig; az én bagariámmal gázolja keresztül a csikorgó telet a
moszkó, meg a polyák; az én szattyánomat viselik a törökök papucsnak, az
én kordoványomat a magyarok sarunak. – És ezért mégsem az én hirem a
legnagyobb a világon: nem a «buzdurgán» név a legragyogóbb a bőrök
között; mert van a csecsenczek közt egy bőrgyáros, a ki azokat a hires
övöket és tüszőket készíti, a mik drágábbak az aranynál. Ez veszi el
előlem az erzerumi vásárt, a hol az örmények, cserkeszek, oszszetek,
mind csak az ő portékáját veszik. S miben áll a titka? Abban, hogy az ő
bőreire ilyen szép kacskaringós irásban vannak aranynyal ezüsttel
rajzolva, sajtolva alkoránból vett szép mondások. Csak ezért keresik
őket olyan nagyon. – Csináltam volna én ezt már régen utánuk; de nem
tudtam szert tenni olyan rabszolgára, a ki irni tudja a mčhdruli
ákombákot. Magam vittem annyira, hogy el tudom olvasni, de az olvasás
meg az irás közt tudod jól, olyan nagy a távolság, mint a földön
lépegetés, meg az égben repdesés közt. A gólya is lépeget a földön, mint
én; de én nem tudok úgy repülni, mint ő. S hamarább meg tudnám azt
tenni, hogy a két öklömmel ennek a pálmafának a derekából ilyen
ákombákot csavarintsak, mint hogy egy nádszár hasított orrával betüt
kanyarítsak belőle. S ezek a murtizigátorok, a kik ezt az irást tudják,
olyan kutyahitüek, hogy a mint egyet közülük a harczban vagy éjjeli
megtámadásban elfogdosunk, mielőtt a lánczot kezére tehetnők, kirántja a
görbe kését s elvágja vele a nyakát s azzal porba esett a pecsenyém. –
Értheted már most, édes fiacskám, hogy milyen nagyon szeretlek én téged,
azért, hogy el nem vágtad a nyakadat. Te tudod a mčhdruli irást! Úgy-e
bár, ezt tinálatok székelyeknél a medreszekben tanítják.

Tamás ráhagyta, hogy igenis: ott tanulta ő ezt a fehérvári
fő-medreszben.

– Hát most te fogod nekem ezt az én irhabőreimre írni! Hahaha! majd
meglátod, hogy kiszorítjuk vele a csecsenczeket az erzerumi vásárból?
Micsoda? Még Bagdadból is! De még Aleppóból is.

(Jól van, jól; gondolá magában Damokos Tamás; de majd mikor kisül, hogy
nem tudok többet annál az egy mondásnál az egész mčhdruli alkoránból,
azt is csak úgy tudom, mint a tyuk az ábéczét!)

Hanem hát már benne volt. Uszni kellett. Hadd lássuk, mi lesz belőle?

Buzdurgán pedig nem tréfált: rögtön futtatá az izoglánjait a kastélyba,
hogy hozzanak a számára pompás öltözeteket s nagy rimánkodásába került
Tamásnak, hogy azt a grácziát elengedjék neki, a mi együtt jár a
turbánviseléssel: tudniillik, hogy a berberbasi simára leborotválja a
koponyáját; jó lesz az így is.

Hanem egy különös kegyelmet kért a murzától, mikor a czifra ruhákat
ráadták, a mi csupa prém és paszománt volt.

– Nem bánom: napestig kész vagyok a te bőrödre arany mondásokat festeni;
hanem azután engedd meg, hogy este megint kijöhessek a kertbe dolgozni.
Ez a munka én nekem a gyönyörűségem.

De még meg is dicsérte ezért a kivánságért a murza.

– Ember vagy fiam! Ilyen szolga kellene nekem sok. Látjátok ti többi
kutyafülüek! Ez nem azt cselekszi, a mit ti, hogy a mint a muezzin estét
ordít, rögtön abba hagyjátok a dolgot; hanem a mikor az egyik munkájába
belefárad, akkor pihenésül a másikat veszi elő; estig betüket ír a
szakmányban, este gyönyörüségből neki áll kapálni. Ne félj, fiam,
megjutalmazlak. Te fogod jövendőben a vétkes, tunya rabszolgáknak a
talpára leszámlálni a botokat.

Tamás köszönte szépen ezt a szivességet: nem kiván belőle.

– Nem kivánod? Pedig én azt gondoltam, hogy ez a legnagyobb gyönyörüség
a világon.

Buzdurgán felvezette a maga kitüntetett rabszolgáját a kastély udvarára.

A nagy négyszögü tér, a mit a palota négy szárnya képezett, olyan
tisztára volt gereblyézve, s behintve fehér poronddal, hogy azon még
csak egy füszál sem volt látható; – a középső napkelet felé fordult
részén volt a széles lépcsőzet, a min a palotába fel lehetett járni, s
ennek a tornáczából indult ki a földszinten körülfutó folyosó, a melyen
folyvást járkáltak alá s fel az eunuch őrök, kivont kardokkal. Mert
azokon a vasajtókon belül, a mik e folyosókról nyilnak, dolgoznak azon a
munkán, a mi Buzdurgánnak legféltettebb titka: a drága bőrök
aranyozásán, virágokkal és betükkel itt festik azokat tele. Ezt a
tudományt őrizni kell, nehogy megszökjék vele valaki. Azért is rendelte
ide azokat a műhelyeket a murza, a saját palotájába, hogy hármas zár
alatt legyenek s mindig az ő szeme előtt.

Olyan alacsonyak is a zárkák ajtajai, hogy közönséges embernek is le
kell bukni, mikor rajtuk belép, maga Buzdurgán pedig épen csak
négykézláb teheti látogatását, s mivel nem illenék, hogy ő fejet hajtson
a rabszolgái előtt, annálfogva háttal szokott hozzájuk bemászni.

Damokos Tamást itt átszolgáltatá a felügyelő timárbasinak, lelkére
kötve, hogy ezt a rabot nagyon megbecsülje, mert ez drága kincs.

Itt azután megtaníták Tamást, hogyan kell ecsettel a bőrre festeni az
arany czikornyákat, aztán miféle tompa vésőkkel és fakalapácsokkal kell
azokat úgy körülveregetni, hogy kidomborodjanak. Tamás egész nap ezt
mívelte.

Este felé kezdte érteni, hogy miért vásárol a csizmadia szőlőt, mihelyt
egy kis pénzhez juthat. Rettenetes dolog az, hogy az ember egész nap az
előtte fekvő bőrt ütögesse kalapácscsal. Ennél sokkal kellemesebb a
kertben kapálni.

Azonban hát ezért a munkáért jó ebédet adnak: piláfot, szultánkenyeret,
sorbetet is hozzá; a kadinának talán mégis jó szándéka volt, mikor erre
feleszelte. Hátha ez lesz a kiszabadulásának az eszköze?

A mint egyszer a mesterségbe beleokult: próbának oda tettek eléje egy
övnek hasított bőrt, hogy cselekedje rá azt a mčhdruli mondást.

Ez nem ment olyan könnyen, mint az arabeszkek munkája; mert csupa
kacskaringókból állnak a betük; de estig mégis csak elkészült meglehetős
sikerrel.

Erre, a mint a muezzin a napot elbucsuztatta, bejött a mühelybe a murza.

Mikor az elkészített övet meglátta, nyalábra kapta Tamásnak a fejét s
olyat csókolt az orczájára, hogy az majd megsüketült bele.

– Hiszen ezt gyönyörűen megcselekedted. Hohó! Hiszen ezzel mind leverjük
az erzerumi vásáron a csecsenczeket. – Nagyon jól van fiam! Holnap
mindjárt csinálj egy másikat, másféle szép mondással az alkoránból.

(Másfélével ám! gondolá Tamás. Ha tudnék másfélét! De ebből az egyből
áll az egész tudományom a pogány szentirásból.)

– Nem, uram, ez még tökéletlen munka, kifogásolá a dolgot ravaszul. Nem
vagyok vele megelégedve: kell hozzá egy néhány hét, a míg a kezem úgy
belegyakorlódik, hogy olyan szépen megcsináljam, mint a milyen a
mustrája.

– A mustrája? kérdezé a murza, s tátva feledte a száját bámultában. Hát
hol láttad te ennek a mustráját?

Tamás csak most vette észre, hogy majd elszólta magát. Hanem aztán
helyreüté a dolgot. Tudta, hogy hitetlenek ellenében a hazudás nem
vétek.

– Hát biz én azt a fehérvári collégiumban, a muzeumban láttam.

Buzdurgán murza nagyot csóvált a hordónyi nagy fején.

– No, mihelyt betörünk megint Erdélybe, meglátogatom azt a fehérvári
nagymedreszt. De ott találjam ennek az övnek a mustráját! Mert ilyen öve
csak az én feleségemnek van, a kadinának, s azt is a patyolat öltönye
alatt viseli, hogy senki sem láthatja rajtam kivül. S ilyen öve van neki
huszonnyolcz: a hold minden napjára más-más.

A murza nagyot fujt.

Tán csak nem fogott neszt?

Azt mondják a czethalról (a ki igen nagy állat), hogy ha annak a farkába
beleütik a szigonyt, kell neki öt percz, a míg az értesítő ideg egész a
fejéig küldi a tudósítást, hogy sebet kapott odahátul s aztán megint
másik öt percz, a míg az agyából az intézkedő ideg visszaküldi az
utasítást, hogy csapjon maga körül a farkával. – Ilyen czethal volt a
szárazföldön a murza: a döfést megkapta a szigonynyal, de kell neki rá
egy hónap, a míg féltékenynyé lesz miatta.

– No hát eredj most a kertbe kapálni.

Tamás lerakta a czifra ruhát, felvette a kertész-gunyát s kiment kapálni
a kertbe.

A többi rabszolgák már akkor mind kitakarodtak onnan.

A mint Tamás a nagy vízmedenczéhez ért, a hol azt a furcsa álmot, meg
azt a még furcsább valóságot látta, eszébe jutott, hogy megvizsgálja a
muzapálmának azt az új hajtású levelét, vajjon nincs-e még ott a
kadinának az öve, a mit tegnap odarejtett. A mint lenyult a
levélgöngyöleg mélyébe, bizony a kezébe akadt a bőröv. Tehát nem jött el
érte a kadina. Ebből baj lesz; mert a murza keresni fogja nála azt a
bizonyos övet.

Hát a mint kihuzza azt és megnézi, akkor látja, hogy az egy egészen
másszinű öv: a tegnapi karmazsinszinű volt, ez pedig égszinkék. Aztán a
cziframondás is egészen más betükből van összerakva rajta.

Tamás erre letört egy agavelevelet, annak a héjára felkarczolta a
tövises hegyével az egész cziframondást a kék övről, ezt azután nagy
hamar visszarejté a muzapálma hajtásába; s aztán az agaveleveléről
mindaddig rajzolgatta a porondba a czikornyákat, míg könyvnélkül
megtanulta; mikor a murza reggel lejött a mosakodásra a köskbe, már
akkor ott gereblyélgetett Tamás megint. Innen aztán együtt tért vissza
ismét a murzával a kastélyba a festőmühelybe.

Ezuttal a tegnap betanult verset készítette ki egy darab ujdonat
égszinkék marokinra ezüsttel.

Mikor a murza este bejött, s meglátta a kész munkát, majd a gerendába
ütötte a fejét meghókonyodtában.

– Te! Damokos Tamás! Ennek a mustráját is a fehérvári nagy medreszben
találtad?

– Ott biz én. Van ott a muzeumban ilyen huszonnyolcz; a hold minden
napjára más-más.

– No! Ne lássam addig a mekkai kaábát, a míg a fehérvári nagy medreszt
meg nem látogatom.

(«Én is ott leszek akkor!» mondá magában Damokos Tamás, elfelejtkezve
rab voltáról.)




HOGY HOZZÁK TÁNCZBA A TÖRÖKÖT?

Hát ha csak felét megálmodta is Ilka asszony ezeknek a krimiai
állapotoknak, akkor bizony (valljuk meg az igazat) elég oka volt neki
siettetni a jó Damokos Tamásnak minél elébb való kiváltatását a keserves
fogságból; mert nem tréfa dolog az, hogy igazhitű keresztyén ember
minden nap pogány alkorán mondásokat másolgasson mčhdruli irásban olyan
mustra után, a mit a tatár murza legszebbik felesége rejtett helyen
visel.

Sürgette is Ilka asszony a kiváltás dolgát, de az csak nem akart előre
menni. Mintha valami titkos kéz, mihelyt meg van kötve a csomó, untalan
eloldozgatná azt.

Egyszer aztán azt mondá Boldizsár bá Ilka asszonynak:

– No drága gyémántom, most már magam megyek fel Gyulafehévárra. Irj két
levelet: az egyiket Akmet bégnek, a szultán tihajájának, a másikat meg
Apor István uramnak, a te tutorodnak. A tihajának csak azt ird, a mit
már máskor, hogy te bizonyosan tudod, szultán ő felsége, kinek Allah
nyujtsa meg az árnyékát, azt rendelte, hogy a kapitányok rabváltsága
kétezer arany legyen; ez készen is van nálad, azonnal elküldöd
Perekopba, mihelyt Damokos Tamást oda kihozzák, oltalom-leveleket adván
neki is, meg nekünk is, a kik a pénzt odavisszük. Több pénzed nincs, nem
is szerezhetsz. Ennyi azonban készen áll.

Ilka asszony még hozzá akarta tenni, hogy odaadja bizony minden
ékességeit, aranyát ezüstjét, marháit azon felül, de Boldizsár bá csak
azt mondta, hogy «ne kinálj te neki egy batkával se többet, meglátod,
hogy utána kap, esze nélkül, csak én beszéljek vele».

Mikor ez a levél készen volt, akkor azt mondá Ilkának:

– No már most édes ragyogó csillagom: irj egy másik levelet a te
tutorodnak, Apor István uram ő kegyelmének is. Ezt majd én dictálom.
Kezd el: «Kedves, egyetlenegy szeretett Pistukám!»

Ilka asszony földhöz csapta azonban a tollat, hogy a hegyével állt meg a
padlóban.

– De már ilyen megszólítást csak nem irok ő kegyelmének!

– Jaj, édes tubavirágszálam: te csak a füleddel hallgasd, a mit én
diktálok, de eszedben ne tartsd meg. Jaj de szeretem ezt a
felgerjedésedet látni! Ha ezt Tamás látná, megenne örömében. De hát csak
irjad te, a hogy én mondom. Én tudom, hogy miből lesz a gáliczkő?
Megállj, majd új calamust csinálok, szép fáin irást tégy, a hogy az
asszony-ember a szerelmesének küld érzékeny izenetet. De tán jobb is
lesz, ha én magam elébb leirom azt a levelet; te aztán magadban
lekópizálod; mert azt már látom, hogy ha fennhangon dictálom, megég az
arczod a szégyennek miatta.

Tehát elkészíté Boldizsár bá papiroson a levelet, a mi eképen szólt:

«Hála az egeknek, hogy a mennybéli gondviselés ismét utat és módot
nyitott a számomra, hogy valahára egymásé lehessünk. Az én uramat, a
kihez a meghalt fejedelem erőszakosan kényszerített hozzámennem, de a
kivel soha egy örömnapja nem volt életemnek, ellenben éjjelem-nappalom
rosszabb vala a purgatoriumnál, elfogta a tatár. Mi nekünk kettőnknek
ezzel nagy örömet szerzett. A mostani fejedelem bölcs akarata
kegyelmedet rendelte el, hogy Damokos Tamás fogsága alatt az én tutorom
legyen s a váramban lakjék. Ezzel csak a mi kölcsönös vágyódásunk érte
el legkivánatosabb beteljesülését. Rettegek azonban azon gondolattól,
hogy ha netalán a Damokos Tamás kiszabadulása által ezen mi édes
boldogságunk megzavartatnék. Ő ha megtudna valamit, engemet talán még
meg is ölne. Azért kérem kegyelmedet, vigye úgy az alkudozást a
váltságdíj iránt a szultán tihajájával, hogy sohase legyen belőle
valóság. Mert ha esztendő egy nap elmulik Damokos Tamás elfogatása után,
akkor az erdélyi törvények szerint a rab felesége elválasztatik tőle és
bátran férjhez mehet. És így ilyenformán végre mi is egymásé lehetünk.
Azért csak kérem igen szépen kegyelmedet, tartsa a tihaját mindenféle
szép kifogásokkal, hogy esztendő egy napig megállapodásra ne jussanak.
Akkor aztán beszéljen Damokos Tamással más, nem én. Mert a lelkem fáj
miatta, ha ránézek azokra a genge kétezer körmöczi aranyakra, a kiket a
bolond fővel rabságba szaladt vétektarisznya Damokos Tamásért kellene
tatár fogára adnunk, holott mennyivel jobban eltudnók ezt mi a magunk
örömére költeni! Milyen szép kamukabársony mentét, dolmányt tudnék én
varratni kegyelmednek, tarka skófiummal! Milyen jó tokaji négy puttonyos
aszuval traktálnám kegyelmedet, ha ez a pénz nekem megmaradna! Azért
csak okosan bánjék el kegyelmed a tihajával, hogy ő rajta muljék el a
kiváltás, ne mirajtunk. Addig is csókolom kegyelmednek a két piros
orczáját százszor meg ezerszer igaz szeretettel.»

– No hallja kegyelmed, Boldizsár bátyám uram, mondá Ilka asszony, mikor
ezt a levelet lemásolva, pennáját kiverte az asztal széléhez, ha a
miatyánkot, hiszekegyet és az üdvözletet visszájáról kellett volna
elmondanom, (a hogy a gonosz boszorkányok cselekszik), nem került volna
annyi lelki kinomba, mint ezeket a sorokat magam kezével leirni. Azonban
az utolsó két sort nem is irtam ám le.

– De pedig azt is odaird, galambszálam! Mert együtt jó az, mint a csúz,
meg a fogfájás. A nélkül nem valóságos ez a levél.

– De hogy irjam én le azt a szót «csókollak» egy idegen férfinak?

– Hiszen ne félj, soha sem kerül ez a levél Apor István uram kezeibe:
sőt inkább visszahozom én ezt te neked, mihelyt elkészült vele a
gáliczkő s akkor a tűzbe dobhatod.

– De én azt hiszem, hogy még a tintának is veressé kell válnia, mikor
ilyen fertelmes mondást leir vele a toll…

– Ne féltsd te azt a tintát, angyalkám. Magam csináltam azt; nem
veresedik az meg száz esztendő mulva sem, mert gumi arabikum van benne.
Csak te rajzold oda még azt a két sort is szépen.

– No hát kegyelmednek a lelke rajta. De én tudom, hogy ha ebből valami
bolondság lesz: hát én felhajtom ezt az egész kalamáris tintát s úgy
ölöm el magamat.

– No csak ne tarts semmitől: minden bajt én vállalok magamra. Most pedig
irasd fel az iródeákoddal erre a két kopertára a két urnak a titulusait:
Akmet bégét magyarul; Apor István uramét pediglen deákul. Ez már ne
legyen a te kezedírása.

Mikor aztán megkapta Czirjék a két levélborítékot, akkor egészen szépen
megcserélte a leveleket, s az Akmet bégnek czímzett borítékba csúsztatta
bele az Apor Istvánhoz irottat, ennek a borítékjába pedig az Akmet
béghez szólót. Így pecsételte le mind a kettőt Ilka asszony pecsétnyomós
gyűrűjével.

– Meglátod, hogy gáliczkő lesz ebből.

Boldizsár bá aztán azt tette, hogy kurtára nyirta a bajuszát, székely
zekét, harisnyát, tört bőr-sarut öltött magára; nyakába akasztott egy
zsiros szeredást, kölcsön kérte a legszélesebb karimájú viseltes kalapot
az öreg gazdától s úgy ment fel gyalog Gyulafehérvárra, ott fűtől-fától
kérdezősködött, hogy hol kapni itt meg a török basát? merre az a palota?
Pedig jobban ismerte ott a járást, mint maga a bakter. Úgy tett, mintha
nem tudna más nyelven, mint székelyül s a palota előtt strázsáló szász
gárdistákat úgy agyba-főbe csókolgatta, hogy azok alig tudták a
csákóikat helyreigazítani utána. Itt is kapott egy hátbaütést, ott is
egyet, míg a sok hátbaütéssel végre csakugyan bebukott Akmet béghez;
ugyan őrizve a kalapját a két kezével, hogy el ne maradjon tőle valahol.

– Hát kied az az Akmet basa? kérdé bebotorkázva.

A tihaja kicsiny, czingár emberke volt, sovány képű görögbe ójtott
arabs.

– Látod; buksi!

– Aújnye! Nálunk mind azt mondják, hogy «török basa, nagy a hasa»; hogy
maradt kied ilyen keszeg?

– Ne ugass, hanem beszélj, mit hoztál?

– Ejnye no. Soha sem láttam én még eleveny török basát: hadd nézzem ki
elébb jól magamat, hogy elmondhassam odahaza a nagyasszonyomnak, miféle
csudát láttam.

– Hát már nincs náladnál okosabb ember a Székelyföldön, te góbé, hogy
téged küldtek ide?

– Van biz ottan, hanem azt okosabb helyre küldik.

– No hát ki küldött? mondd el.

– Hát ki küldött volna? Csak nem vetyegtem ide magamtul, mint egy
goromba? Csak nem is a Herkópáter küldött. De meg nem is a vörös gárgyán
küldött. Sem pedig a tarka Jeezus nem küldött kiedhez engemet talántán,
vagy mi?

– Ördög bujjék a kelepelő nyelvedbe! Add ki már, hogy ki küldött?

– Hát nám mondom, hogy a nagyasszonyom küldött?

– Ki az a te nagyasszonyod?

– Ne te né! Hogy teszi kied magát, mintha nem tudná, hogy ki az én
nagyasszonyom? Hiszen ahajt küld kiednek egy paksamétát tülem, hát csak
tudni kell kiednek, hogy ki irja ezt az instancziát?

– Óh te külüfejű! Már hogy tudnám, hogy ki írja hozzám a levelet, a míg
fel nem bontom. Adsza a levelet.

– Hm. Nem addig van ám az! Mert hát két paksamétát hozék. Az egyiket az
Están urnak hozám. Aztán a jobbikat a jobbik csizmám szárába dugám, a
balabbikat meg a balcsizmám szárába dugám, s már most nem tudom, hogy
melyik légyen a bal, melyik a jobb!

– Óh, hogy a ménkő csapogasson a két füled közé! hát nem tudsz olvasni?

– Hiszen ha olvasni tudnék, nem járnék gyalog, hanem beállnék püspöknek:
hat lovon járnék.

– Add ide azt a két levelet! Majd megmondom én, hogy melyik szól nekem?

Czirjék nagy küzködéssel előkereste a két levelet a két csizmaszárból.
Biz az nagyon egyforma volt mind a kettő: az ember megtéveszthette.

– De aztán ne a jobbikat vegye el kied magának.

Akmet bég kikapta a neki czímzett levelet Boldizsár kezéből, a ki
egészen odaállt az orra elé.

– Jól van! Most állj oda az ajtóhoz és meg ne mozdulj! Befogd a szádat:
ne fújd rám a foghagymás kolbásznak a szagát.

– Aújnya! Kied talán próféta epret evett, hogy még azt is kitalálja,
hogy mit evett a székely ma?

És aztán a legegyügyűbb pofával támaszkodék neki az ajtófélnek s az
egyik szemét be is húnyta, csak a másikkal sandított a törökre, hogy mit
fog az most mindjárt mívelni, ha azt a levelet (a mi nem neki van írva)
elolvassa.

Akmet bég a diványon ült akkor, a midőn a levelet felbontotta, a két
lábát törökösen maga alá szedve. A mint elkezdte a levelet olvasni,
egyszerre csak kirugta maga alul az egyik lábát, a mint tovább ment,
menmeg a másikat; aztán az öklével taszította meg a levegőt, ahajt
talpra ugrott; az egyik lábát felkapta a másik után s nagyokat
dobbantott, hol a fejéhez kapott, hol a térdére ütött: az ábrázatjának a
cserszine csokoládészinüre vált; elkezdett toporzékolni dühében. –
Boldizsár csak nézte ezt nagy delectátióval, s aztán mikor látta, hogy
nagyon ugrál a török, elővette a zeke ujjából a tilinkóját s elkezdett
rajta kedélyesen furulyázni.

– Elment az eszed, kutyaszánkázta góbéja, hogy itt nekem furulyázol?

– Hát azt gondoltam, hogy a «boriczát» akarja kied tánczolni.

– Majd tánczoltatom én mindjárt a te hátadon a korbácsot, csak sokat
mókázz velem! Micsoda bolond levelet adtál nekem? Hisz ez nem nekem
szól.

– Nám mondtam, hogy ne a jobbikat vegye el kied! De hát az után
kapkodott, a melyik zsirosabb volt.

– Hozd ide, hol a másik?

– Nem én addig, a míg az egyiket vissza nem adja kied.

– Itt van, kapd el! Aztán mondd meg az asszonyodnak, hogy az iródeákjára
vágasson tizenkettőt, a miért a kopertákat elcserélte.

– Hát a volt a hibás? No mert már megijedék, hogy talán a szászok
cserélték el a lábaimat, mikor ott aluvék Ebesfalván.

– Nesze most ennek a másik levélnek a kopertája; tedd bele az egyiket:
ez szól az Apor István uramnak. De hazudj neki valamit, hogy miért van a
koperta feltörve, mert ha megtudja, hogy én olvastam el a neki szánt
levelét a nagyasszonyodnak, bizony olyan ötvenet csapat rád, hogy nem
adod százért!

– Dejszen majd leragasztom én ezt fáinul, macskamézzel, hogy a bolond se
látja meg. Azért nem muszáj hazudni. Soha sem hazudok én igazán. Ha
peniglen észreveszi valamelyest, majd úgy megmagyarázom én azt neki,
hogy soha sem érti meg. Ejnye no, hogy hát ez így el volt cserélve. Né!
Már micsoda dolog ez hát? Ejnye Jézuskám. Haj, haj. No.

– Elmehetsz már Isten hirével! Mire vársz még?

– Hát csak azt instálom, hogy ha hazamék, s otthon majd azt kérdi tőlem
a nagyasszonyom: «no te Palya, hát kaptál-e egy pohár bort a basa
urnál!» hát mit mondó legyek neki?

– Vagy úgy? Dörmögé a bég, s a tarsolyába nyúlva, oda dobott egy
félpiasztert Boldizsárnak, a mit az elkapott a nagy kalapjával röptében.
Itt van! Igyál rajta egyet!

– Hehéj! Hisz ez török pénz! Az apám látott ilyet, de én nem. Megér ez
kétannyit, mint a fele! De biz ezt én be nem iszom. No ezt hazaviszem a
gyerekeimnek, hadd tanuljanak meg tőle törökül. Adjon Isten kiednek basa
uram ezer annyit, (de ne a mi zsebünkből). Áldja meg az Isten, jártában,
keltében, minden maradékaival együtt; vigye szerencsésen a maga
országába haza; adjon Isten kiednek bort, buzát, bölcseséget, jámbor
csendes feleséget; jól szelelő pipát, vágott dohányt; megőrizze a rossz
nyavalyától, ha pedig kiszólítja ez árnyékvilágból…

– Ha nem szaladsz mindjárt, rögtön elveszem a kalapodat! Riaszta rá
Akmet bég a hálálkodásból kifogyhatatlanra, s ez a fenyegetés volt a
legsikeresebb; Boldizsár olyan sebten ugrék ki az ajtón, úgy, hogy ha
ide hátbaütésekkel igazították a bég cselédei, innen ki viszont
üstökczibálással vezették; mert úgy szaladt, mintha lopott volna.
Azonban a nagy húsz fontos kalapjával úgy talála fejbe ütni egy goromba
csauszt, hogy az összenyaklott alatta, a kapuban útját álló szász
alabárdosra pedig ráfogta a tilinkóját, a mitől az megijede, azt vélvén,
hogy puska, s hátat adott. Mikor pedig aztán már egyszer Boldizsár kinn
volt a piaczon, akkor abba hagyta a futást: a szájába vette a
tillinkóját s nagy gyönyörüséggel billegette el rajta azt a szép székely
nótát, hogy «aluszol-e te juhász? Hej dehogy aluszom». Hagyták menni
békén.

Nem is kereste ő aztán Apor István uramat azzal a czigányutczára szaladt
levéllel, hanem iparkodék minél hamarább kívül kerülni a sánczkapun,
nehogy felismerje valaki, s aztán hazafelé vette az útját: nem is igen
sietvén vele; még három napra való kolbász volt a szeredásában.

No, hanem az szép találkozás volt, a mi erre következett Akmet bég és
Apor István között! Én nem tudom, mert nem voltam ott; de csak
elképzelem, hogy mikor a nemes úr szokás szerint délután ellátogatott a
tihajához, a kinél mindennapos volt fekete kávéra, hogy micsoda
szemekkel nézett az rajta végig.

– Ejnye de szép dolmányod van, joldás (pajtás)! Kamuka bársony, úgy-e?
Szeretnél úgy-e, egy egész kaftányt is kamuka bársonyból? Skófiummal
kivarrva, úgy-e? Az lehetne szép! Az illenék jól a termetedre!

Apor István nem gondolt egyebet, mint hogy Akmet bég a nagy barátság
jussán őt egy díszkaftánynyal akarja megajándékozni.

– Hát a tokaji bort szereted-e, joldás? – Azt a négy puttonyost! Az
lehet valami jó! Magam is megiszom, a mikor nem látják.

Apor István szentül azt hitte, hogy Akmet bég most mindjárt előhoz egy
olyan faedényt, a miről a magyar azt énekli, hogy «aszuszőlős átalag,
jaj de régen láttalak!»

– Hát a szép menyecskét szereted-e, joldás? Az olyan menyecskét, a ki
szalmaözvegy; a kinek van ura, csakhogy hátul köték a sarkát és nem
jöhet haza? Szeretsz-e kecske lenni a káposztás kertben? szeretsz-e
macska lenni a tejfeles fazék mellett? Hej te Apor István! Azt nézem én
ki a te két szemedből, hogy te nagyon szereted a szépet!

A főúr valósággal azt hitte, hogy ez a török úr most valami okos
dologban töri a fejét. Ez az ő gyönge oldala.

Akkor aztán kiverte a pipájából a hamut a bég, s felhörpenté a kávéja
maradékát s odahajolva a joldásához, azt sugá neki a fülébe:

– No hát nem eszel belőle. Mert én ezelőtt egy órával indítottam el a
lovas stafétát tatár Krimiába, hogy hozzák ki a rabságból Damokos Tamást
Perekopig; elfogadtatik a kinált váltságdíj érette: kétezer arany! a
minek egy tizede az enyém, két tizede a kháné, a többi a murzáé. Egy
hónap mulva otthon lesz a várában Damokos Tamás.

Apor István uram boszusan gondolá magában: ugyan ki lehetett az a
gézengúz, a ki ezt a dolgot így megkonfundálta? S hogyan lehetne ezen
még becsületesen fordítani?

Nem iszol te abból a tokajiból!

A tutor nem értett belőle semmit. Nem kapta ám ő azt a levelet, a mit a
bég elolvasott.

Boldizsár bá pedig csak úgy harmadnapra vetődött haza gyalogsorban
Mikó-Ujvárra.

Ilka asszonynak már akkor a kezében volt Akmet bég válasza a levelére
(azt lóháton hozták), a miben értesíti a nagyasszonyt, hogy elfogadtatik
a kinált váltságdíj, csak küldje minél előbb Perekopba: ott átadják az
urát érte.

Jaj, milyen nagy örömsirással fogadta Boldizsár bát a szegény jó
asszony! Hogy megölelgette! Majd hogy a kezeit is meg nem csókolgatta:
«olvassa kegyelmed a tihája levelét!»

– Tudom én, édes mézem, mi van benne? ha nem olvasom is; – én pedig
visszahoztam neked azt a másik levelet, a minek megirása neked annyi
sírásba került. Tedd el, össze ne tépd. Majd ha Damokos Tamás előkerül:
sokszor elővegyük s nagyokat nevessünk rajta!




MUNDUKA RAVASEL.

Nem telt bele két hét, hogy Apor István uram vágtatva jött öt lovas
hintóval Mikó-Ujvárra s még a dobogó hidon elkezdett valamit kiabálni,
de a mit csak akkor értettek meg, mikor a várudvarba érkezve, ujra
kezdte.

– Itt a kezemben a fetva! Hozom haza Damokos Tamást! Meg van már Damokos
Tamás! Örüljön, örvendjen kegyelmed Damokosné asszonyom! Jön már az ura!
Én hozom a szabadságát!

Olyan nagyon kiabált, hogy az ember azt hihette volna, hogy már ott
hozza valahol a Damokos Tamást a saroglyában.

– No no! Mondá erre Boldizsár bá. «Lassan a testtel!»

A szegény Ilka asszony is nagy örömre volt gerjedve, a a mint azt a zajt
meghallotta; kivált mikor Apor István azt a függőpecsétes fetvát
megszünt lobogtatni a kezében s kiteríté az asztalra, s ő aztán meglátta
benne azt a sok török szarkalábat, de a miknek közepette piros tintával
pingálva maga a név ugyan olvasható vala: «Tomasius Damokos de Newtood.»
Ez már itt van!

«Itt van már a mi Tamásunk.» Mondá Apor István s olyan ragyogó orczával
tekinte Ilka asszonyra, hogy az szinte kísértetbe jött, hogy kezet
nyújtson neki hála fejében, hanem Boldizsár bá egyet olyat nézett rá,
hogy elment a kedve a kézszorongatástól.

– Itt biz’ a «rák a levélben», mondá Czirjék; de nagy út az odáig, a míg
azt megkapjuk. Hadd tegyek csak egy pillantást ebbe a tarkafirkába.

Mint a féle ezermesternek, törökül is csak kellett neki tudni.

A míg pedig azt az irást (visszájáról) kisilabizálta, sok fejcsóválást
mívelt azalatt.

– Sok teketória jár ám még ezzel. Azt értém meg belőle, hogy a Tamást
csak Perekopig hozzák ki s nekünk kell odáig elküldenünk a kétezer arany
váltságdíjat. Azután, hogy ezzel a fetvával két embernél több nem
utazhatik. Annak sem szabad a kardon kívül semmi más fegyvert vinni
magával, se puskát, se pisztolyt.

– Jól van, jól, mondá Apor; de ellenben meg van hagyva mindenütt a
bégeknek, agáknak és hoszpodároknak, hogy egyik várostól a másikig hat
fegyveres lovast adjanak egy csauszal együtt kiséretül a pénz vivőinek;
hol pedig veszedelmes az út, a hegyek között, s félni lehet a
hajdemákoktól, ott még azonkívül tizenkét fegyveres plájászt.

– Csakhogy tudom ám én jól, hogy mennyit ér azoknak a spáhi uraknak, meg
a plájász ficsóroknak a védelme valami igazi veszedelem idején, jobban
rá merném én bizni magamat az én hóka lovamra, meg a kovás puskámra,
mint arra az egész kiséretre.

– Már pedig az így van elrendelve. Ez kötött marschruta: ettől el nem
szabad térni.

– Hát hiszen majd kifundáljuk a dolgot; csak hadd gondolkozzam rajta egy
cseppet; mert nem tréfa dolog ám kétezer aranynyal, puska, mordály
nélkül keresztülútazni Moldvaországon.

Ilka asszony pedig jaj de szerette volna, hogy nyomban repültek volna
Perekopba.

– Hát csak egy kis útravaló pogácsáról, elemózsiáról is kell
gondoskodni. Mondá Boldizsár bá.

Ilka asszony rögtön futott az övéről lekapott kulcscsomóval, kiadni az
éléstárból a szakácsnak: süssön mindenfélét az utazóknak.

– Várj csak, galambocskám, majd én leszedem a sonkákat a füstölőből;
mondá Boldizsár bá, utána sietve nagy készségesen, s mikor aztán egyedül
voltak a kamrában, azt mondá: «nem akartam az előtt a másik előtt
szólni; de én nekem most épen eszembe jutott az a mese a révészről, a
kinek egy folyón egy farkast, egy kecskét, meg egy káposztát kellett
átszállitani, még pedig úgy, hogy egyszerre csak egyet szállíthatván át
a lélekvesztőjén, az alatt a másik parton vagy a farkas meg ne egye a
kecskét, vagy a kecske a káposztát. Hát most én is ezen tusakodom ám
magamban. Mert ha én most magam megyek el a pénzzel, s itthon hagyom a
várban Apor István uramat: akkor együtt marad az innenső parton a farkas
a kecskével, ha pedig ő rá bizom a pénzt, hogy vigye el Perekopba Tamást
kiváltani, akkor a tulsó parton lesz a kecske a káposztával!»

– Ejnye! Kegyelmed mindig a legrosszabbat gondolja az emberről.

– Ez az egy virtusom van, a miért szeretem magamat.

Midőn azonban déli harangszóra az ebédnél összegyülekezének, az
étkezőben Boldizsár bá, szokása szerint, leghamarább érkezvén meg, hogy
a háziasszonynak a leves kimérésénél segítsen, s a kenyérfelszelést
másnak ne engedje, akkor Ilka asszony így beszélgetett hozzája:

– No lássa kegyelmed, hát a mesebeli révész mégis csak kitalálta
végtére, hogy mi módon szállítsa át a farkast is, meg a káposztát is
egyik partról a másikra, a nélkül, hogy valamelyik a másikat megegye. Az
imént nyilatkoztatá ki Apor István uram, hogy ő semmi módon el nem
engedi magától vétetni azt a szerencsét, hogy kegyelmeddel együtt menjen
Moldvába, a pénzt elvinni az én lelkem uramért. És így már most a farkas
is, meg a káposzta is együtt mennek, a kecske pedig itthon marad.

– No ha azt mondta Apor István komám, akkor hát neki osztom a zuzáját.

(Jaj, de érteni kell ám ezt! Mert hát itt mi nálunk az a szokás még mai
nap is, hogy mikor azt a drága jó lúdgégés[2] levest kiosztják, annyi
szerecsendiót reszelnek föléje, a mennyi elég egy magyarnak, hát még
azon feljül a mi aprólékja van a kácsának, lúdnak, a májával és
zuzájával együtt, szintén felosztják a tányérokba, a nélkül, meg paprika
nélkül nem volna igazi a leves.)

(Hanem aztán megint van egy magyar példabeszéd, a mi azt mondja, hogy
«hamis a zuzája!» Valakit a lúd zúzájával megkinálni, gyönge czélzásnak
vétetik.)

No de annál többet ittak azon ebéd alatt Damokos Tamás uramnak a boldog
kiszabadulásáért! Elfogyott egy veder bor az asztalnál, s az inasok nem
győzték a lengyel meggyvizes karcsú palaczkokat ujra töltögetni, a
miknek a tartalmát kotyogtatva kell inni.

Ilka asszony tudatá az útra kelendő uraságokkal, mi mindenféle drága
elemózsia van összehalmozva a számukra az útra. Azt elvinni magát kell
egy fogadott mokány ló.

Ebéd után aztán Apor István uram, meg Czirjék Boldizsár hadnagy kiülének
a szakállszárítóra pépányozni. A boros veder ide is utánuk kivánkozott.

– Hát holnap reggel korán hajnalban útrakelnénk Ojtoz felé. Mondá
Czirjék Boldizsár.

– De má minek mennénk mi Ojtoz felé és nem Gijmesnek? veté ellen Apor
István uram, mikor az először is nagy kerülő; háromszor annyira van a
határhoz és négyszer annyira Jászvásárhoz, mint ha Gijmes felé mennénk
ki; másodszor, a míg a gijmesi szorosban a székely határőrség strázsál,
addig Ojtoznál, a hires Rákóczy várat a török tartja megszállva, annál
kell kéredzkednünk.

– Az ám, mert nem kellett volna a várőrségnek épen akkor szedni széjjel
a puskáit, tisztogatás végett, mikor a törökök megrohanták a várat, hogy
aztán egyet se tudjanak lőni.

– No de már az megvan. Az a vár most a töröké.

– Hát az nem baj. Legalább a mint előmutatjuk a fetvánkat, azonnal
kapunk kiséretül hat szpahit, a ki elkoczog velünk Bakuig.

– De miért mégis az a nagy kerülés?

– Hát csak egy szót mondok, s az elég lesz, «Munduka Ravasel».

– A rablóvezér?

– Elég jó hire van, mindenki ismeri a nevét. Ha magát az érdemes
personáját senki se tisztelheti is, mert a zsiványkodásánál fekete
álarczot visel.

– Nagyobb annak a füsti, mint a lángja.

– De én a füstjét sem szeretem, (hogy töltené vele a poklokat). Azt
azonban bizonyosan mondhatom, hogy ez a martalócz most az egész hajdemák
csapatjával ott kóriczál a gijmesi szoros körül s lesi a Bakuba menő
vásárosokat.

– Kitől tudja ezt kegyelmed?

– Hát kitől mástól, mint az oláh-csügödiektől. Mert a gijmesi határon
két falu áll egymással szemben; Magyar-Csügöd Erdélyben, Oláh-Csügöd
Moldvában; csakhogy a Magyar-Csügödben csupa oláhok laknak, az
Oláh-Csügödben pedig merő csángó magyarok. Ezektől kaptam az értesülést.

– Hát akkor jól van. Akkor menjünk Ojtoz felé, mondá Apor István;
megadva magát ennek az arguválásnak.

De nagyon szeget ütött a fejébe Boldizsárnak ez a gyors engedékenység.
Mi lehet ennek a köpenyege alatt?

Kezdte már bánni nagyon, hogy egy pillanatra hűtelen lett ahhoz a
virtusához, hogy a legrosszabbat teszi föl az emberről, s elmondta a
maga kedves komájának az igazi okot, a mért nem akar a rövidebb uton
menni ki Moldovába. Hogy minek beszélt neki Mundukáról?

De annyira csak még sem birt skeptikus lenni, hogy gyökeret hagyjon
verni a lelkében annak a gyanunak, hogy előkelő magyar főur, az Apor
familiából, a melynek minden tagja dicsőséggel és becsülettel halmozza
el azt az Attilával egyidejű ős székely nevet: egy «Apor», a kinek ha a
nevén kívül semmije sem maradt, még akkor is gazdagabb egy oláh
hospodárnál, hogy az képes legyen valami oly árulást elkövetni, a minek
a szégyenét az Olt vize se mossa le róla! Hogy az titokban
összeszövetkezzék egy oláh rablóvezérrel. Nem! ilyen rosszat már csak
még sem tudott róla föltenni.

Mert nem vette számításba, hogy nagy ördög az a szerelem. A kit annak a
bögölye megcsip, kirug az minden hámból: még a becsület hámjából is.
Hogy a ki úgy meg van bolondulva egy szép asszonyért, annak semmi se
lehetetlen, mikor arról van szó, hogy azt a más kezéről elszakíthassa,
magához köthesse.

No, hogy ez egyszer ilyen jóhiszemű volt Boldizsár bá, annak majd
megadja az árát keservesen, ő is, meg más is.

A mint ennek a beszélgetésnek vége volt, Apor István uram nagyot
nyujtózkodott s azt mondá:

– Ejh, de kegyetlenül ellakám vala! Egy siket fajdot megettem majd
egészen, a mézesmálit meg nem is számítottam, hány kupával csuszik le? A
«tálbansült» kissé kövér is volt. Csak a hátamba ne álljon a csömör a
sok mindenféle jótól! Nem fog ártani, ha egyet lovagol az ember az
erdőben. Hátha csapázás közben még egy vad koczát is elejthetnék.

Boldizsár bá ráhagyta, hogy no hát lovagolja ki azt a nagy evést-ivást,
ha máskép nem bir vele.

Apor István aztán előhozatta a paripáját s kilovagolt a várból; csatlóst
sem vitt magával.

De olyan soká kimaradt a főur, hogy estére válván az idő, Boldizsár bá
nem győzte tovább várni: lefeküdt, elaludt.

Azonban oly imette szokott mindig aludni, hogy a mint a hidon
meghallatszott a hazatérő főur lovának a dobaja, rögtön fölébredt rá, s
meg akarta tőle kérdezni, hogy ugyan talán eltévedt az erdőben valahol s
talán egy egész vaddisznókondát hoz magával haza a cserkészetből?
Azonban az a nagy lárma, pofozkodás, a mit a lováról leszálló főur
elkövetett a cselédség között oda lenn az udvaron, aztán meg a
pitvarban, végig a tornáczon, eléggé fölvilágosítá őt az állapotokról.
Úr uram ámbár csak egyedül jött meg, mégis hozott haza egy disznót.
Nyilván folytatta a szomszédban a kupák ürítgetését, s ilyenkor aztán
jobb kitérni az utjából, mert belevész ez még az útfélen álló ártatlan
kőszentbe is.

Azonban ismét lefeküdvén a hárságyra, nagyon rosszakat álmodék Boldizsár
bá; elannyira, hogy mikor fölébrede, s felnyergeltetvén a paripákat,
mindent elkészíte az útra, a mokány lovat is megterhelte az elemozsinás
tarisznyákkal, a pénzes turbát pedig felcsatolá erősen a saját lovának
hátára a nyereg mögé; hát e közben, folyvást a rossz álmait
magyarázgatva, az a furcsa bogara támadt, hogy hátha most már csak azért
is Gijmes felé venné az utat?

Hej ha ez után a bogár után indult volna, az nem vezette volna őtet
ezuttal valami gonosz büdübe.

De nem akart most már az utitársával e miatt ungorkodni.

Lett arra alkalom a nélkül is.

Mert a mint Apor István uramba lelket lehetett verni, hogy felöltözék és
elkészüle az útra: Boldizsár bá majd a falnak esett, mikor meglátta őt
előtámadni granát szinű karassia posztó-köpönyegben, ezüst gallércsattal
és az alatt karmazsinpiros kamuka-dolmányban, arany sujtással.

– Hejhej! Kegyelmes komám, lakodalomhoz öltözék kegyelmed! Kár lesz ez a
czifra öltözet erre a nehéz útra.

– Az nem a kendtek gondja! förmedt rá a főur. (Mikor nagy crapulája
volt, mindenkit «kend»-nek tractált.)

– De az én gondom is, mert ha így meglátnak bennünket az oláhok
útközben, mind azt hiszik, hogy herczegek vagyunk s rézgaras helyett
aranyat várnak tőlünk fizetésképen.

– Hadd várjanak! Én fizetem! horkantott rá Apor István nagy kevélyen, a
tarsolyára csapva, hogy csak úgy csörömpölt. Lássák, hogy urakkal van
dolguk.

– Hát jól van, akkor én is felveszem a parádés ruhámat; nekem is van
veres dolmányom, granátszin köpenyegem. Különben azt hiszik, hogy én
kegyelmednek az inasa vagyok.

– Kend pedig csak maradjon a kékbelijében! toporzékolt rá mérgesen a
főur. Kendnek abban is jó!

Czirjék nem veszekedett vele. Hiszen úgy se vette volna fel az ünneplő
köntösét. Jobb az ilyen útra a jó báránybőrrel béllelt dóka, meg a nagy
kerek köpönyeg brassói posztóból.

Még az elindulás előtt lejöve hozzájuk Ilka asszony, a két kis fiát is
lehozva az ölében, hogy búcsút vegyen az útrakelőktől s mindenféle
izeneteket kössön az emlékezetükre, a miket azok az ő szerelmes urának
átadni el ne felejtsenek, még a két kis poronty is küldött egy-egy
üzenetet az apának; a kisebbik az igaz, hogy nem többet, csak annyit,
hogy «pá-pá!»

Még azután is, hogy eltávozának, sokáig lobogott utánuk az a fehér kendő
onnan a vár erkélyéről, üdvözletet, áldást küldve a vándorok útjára, a
mit a hátratekintgető Apor mind a maga számára foglalt le, ő válaszolván
az üdvözlésekre, vitézi módon kivont kardjának megvillantásával. S mikor
így hátramaradott visszaköszöntgetni, olyan édes volt, mint a reszelt
füge, midőn megint oda rugaszkodott Boldizsár bá mellé, akkor mérges
volt, mint a fias ménkü.

De úgy látszik, hogy Ilka asszony áldásai nem igen érték őket utól, mert
a mire Kézdi-Vásárhelyre értek, Apor István uramnak a lova mind a négy
patkóját elvesztette. Ott meg kellett hálni s az egész lovat ujra
megvasaltatni. De még más időhaladék is támadt. A török azt rendelte,
hogy a ki valamely szoroson ki akar menni Erdélyből a Havasalföldre,
annak el kell magát látni paksussal; még pedig a brassói tanácstól, mert
a mostani nyomoruságos időkben a háromszéki királybirákat mind
rabszolgaságra hurczolták. Ki menjen hát Brassóba?

– Lóduljon be kelmed hamarjában! Mondá Apor Czirjéknek.

– Én? Brassóba? A szindikushoz paksust kérni? Inkább szunyogot nyuzni
fanyelű bicskával!

Tehát Apornak kellett beugratni a teherhordó mokány lovon. Csak másnap
estére került vissza.

Két napot tehát már eltarisznyázának az úton, csak harmadnap reggel
indulhattak neki az ojtozi szorosnak.

De az is nagyon szakadozott utazás volt; nem mintha valami veszedelem
állt volna a vándorok elé, sőt inkább a nagyon is barátságos fogadtatás
miatt. Végig kellett menniök a hosszú Nyújtódon, a Damokosok
eredethelyén s az Aporok mostani birtokán, ott egyik kastély a másikat
éri, valamennyiben mind atyafi lakik, annak a portája előtt meg csak nem
lehet úgy elhaladni, hogy az ember be ne térjen egy szóra; ilyenformán
Bereczknél tovább megint nem juthattak naplementig s csak negyed nap
láthatták meg a szép Rákóczy várat az ojtozi szorosban. A többi szép,
nagy, erős várakat mind elpusztították a mongolok, a kik erre vonultak
ki, a Rákóczy vár akkoriban még új vár volt.

Itt már aztán kezdődött a török világ. A két vándor úrnak meg kellett
mutatni az igaz járatbeli voltuknak minden bizonyítványait a parancstevő
aga előtt, a ki megfeketekávéztatván őket, a fetva értelmében rendelt
melléjük hat darab szarácsit, régi, kanóczos puskákkal, aztán meg
tizenkét szál oláh plájást, a kiknek a salláriumát előre mindjárt le is
fizették.

Mindezek egész Oknáig voltak fogadva, a mi a legközelebbi határszéli
város Moldovában, alig egy jó hajtás az ojtozi Rákóczy vártól hegynek
lefelé.

Idáig csinált út volt egész a határig, régi várak romjai a hegytetőkön;
kallók, ványló malmok, kásatörők, fürészmalmok, ércz-zuzók az Ojtoz
folyam mentén, bekerített szilvások, a szép kőházak körül, az oláh
határon egyszerre mindez megszünt, az út nem út többé, csak görgeteg
kövek végtelen vágánya, csupa fenyőerdő minden egész az ösvény martjáig;
csak a bemeszelt fák mutatják, hogy merre kell tartani a haraszt lepte
bozótban: itt-amott a tisztáson egy pakulár-gunyhó, mellette egy
szénaboglya, felpóczkolva egy terebélyes fa tetejére, néhol a nappal is
sötét mély útban egy kiálló sziklán látszik egy sok ágú keresztfa,
melynek minden oldala tele van irva cyrill-betükkel. Ott valami gazdag
bojárt vertek agyon a zsiványok: annak az emlékére emelték azt a
hirmondó keresztet az utódok.

Egy helyen ezt az útnak csufolt járókát egy meredek palakő-sziklapadmaly
annyira odaszorítja az Ojtoz folyamhoz, hogy a lovagoknak magában a
mederben kell csülökig gázolni. A palakőréteg amfitheatrum alakban
karéjt fog, a miben a folyó fennakad; ezt meg azután mesterségesen
összébb vonja valami cziklopsi kőrakás: úgy látszik, hogy ez is valami
hajdankori agathyrz munka, a mikből azután a meggyüjtött vizet,
ellenséges berohanás idején a támadók fejére zudíták. Azóta senkinek sem
jutott eszébe ezt a védgátat egészen elrontani, s az most is ott állt,
szinig megtelve vízzel, a meredekebb partjairól hosszan libegett alá a
tavak zöld «úszszakála», a csendesebb öböl rejtekében pedig felverte a
vizi tök, meg a békakorsócska, széles gömbölyű bőrleveleivel.

Itt csak egyesével lehetett haladni a karavánnak.

Elől ügettek a plájások mokány lovaikon, középen a két utazó magyar
uraság, hátul a hat török szarácsi.

Mikor a palakő-padmaly mögül kikaptattak a nyilt térre, hát egyszerre a
közeli erdőből sűrű puskaropogás üdvözölte a karavánt.

Embert ugyan nem talált a golyó, hanem azért tökéletes lett az ijedtség
erre az orvtámadásra. A plájások egyszerre mind hason feküdtek a földön,
hogy még tanunak se lehessen őket hívni: ők nem láttak semmit; a
szarácsiak pedig megfordították a lovaik fejét s hátrafelé gyorsan
elszeleltek.

S akkor egyszerre nagy ordítozással rohant elő az erdőből minden
oldalról a hajdemák sereg: lehettek negyvenen-ötvenen. A ki a parancsot
osztotta közöttük, az egy magas, veres köpenyeges alak volt, fekete
selyem álarczczal, az arnót harámbasák módjára öltözve.

Boldizsár bá mindjárt kitalálta, hogy ez a Munduka Ravasel. Ilyennek
irják le, a kik vele találkoztak s élve megmenekültek a körme közül.

Ennek ugyan a torkába jöttek, mikor épen ki akarták kerülni. Valaki
elárulta neki az errefelé választott útjokat.

Apor István uram erre a rémségre azonnal vitézül kardot rántott, s neki
rugtatott – a hátrafelé vonulásnak, a merre a szarácsiak is elinaltak.

Egynehány handzsáros hajdemák ugyan eléje kapott a sziklán
keresztülszökdelve s elállta az útját, hanem ekkor Munduka Ravasel dörgő
hangon kiálta reájuk, hogy szikla és erdő viszhangzott bele:

«A vöröset hagyjátok futni, csak a kéket gyilkoljátok agyon.»

Boldizsárnak valami világosság lobbant át az agyán erre a szóra: nem
erre való volt-e az a pirosba-veresbe való öltözködés?

Hanem e fölött nem sok ideje maradt elmélkedni, mert egyszerre több
puska ropogott körülötte s ő észrevette, hogy lova megrogyik alatta. A
lovát sebesítették halálra.

No innen most nincsen menekülés.

Apor István már messze elrugtatott a veszedelem helyéről, a nélkül, hogy
a kardját csak egyszer is összecsapta volna az önként utat nyitott
rablókkal, s még csak hátra sem tekintett; Boldizsár magára volt hagyva,
egyedül. S bár legalább a puskája lett volna vele.

A lova csülkeire rogyott alatta, három golyó is találta szegény párát.
Csak nagy ügyességének köszönheté Boldizsár bá, hogy maga is a lova alá
nem szorult, de kétfelé vetett lábakkal szépen talpon maradt s
kiszökhetett a kengyeleiből, mielőtt a rablók az üstökébe
kapaszkodhattak volna.

Nem volt itt meggondolásra való idő annyi sem, mint egy ménkücsapásnak
századrésze. Előtte az egyedüli szabad tér, a mély vízgyüjtő tó, abba
ruhástól, köpönyegestől bele! Csak azután, mikor odalenn vala a biztos
vízfenéken, akkor kezdett el azon gondolkodni, hogy de mi lesz már most?
Itt már volt rá egy kis ideje.

Élni kell! Ez volt az első thesis. Ez volt a feladat. A «quis? – quid?»
– «ubi?» meg volt állapítva. De «quibus auxiliis?» Ez várt még
megoldásra. Micsoda segítséggel?

Kik vannak itt? Nagy víz. Nymféa bokrok a víz alatt, leveleik fölötte,
jó árnyék, rengeteg sok pisztráng.

Megvan!

A köpönyegét kikapcsolta a nyakából s víznek ereszté.

Hallotta jól, odafenn hogy biztatták egymást a rablók, «a mint felbukik,
lőjjed!»

«Csak te lőjjed!»

Annak a köpönyegnek a belső zsebében volt egy jó nagy darab kolbász. Azt
a pisztrángok rögtön megsejtették s prédálni kezdték. Ettől a víz
szinére emelkedő köpenyeg olyan rángatózásba jött, mintha igazi ember
volna alatta. Hangzott is rá a puffogás és a köpönyeg nem egy golyót
kapott. Hanem az azért csak úszott és rángatózott tovább, míg belekerült
a folyam árjába s akkor aztán haladt a víz sodrában.

Hanem hát ez jó volt a köpönyegnek; de a gazdájának odalenn a víz
fenekén lélegzeni is kell.

Az is mind kitelik a maga emberségéből. Itt van a hosszú
törökmeggyfa-pipaszár, a mit az ember az övébe dugva visel, annak az
egyik végét a szájába dugja, a másikat felereszti a nymféa bokrok közé s
olyan szépen elpipázgatja azon keresztül a drága jó levegőt, hogy csupa
gyönyörüség a dolga.

Hallgatta, hogy mit beszélnek odafenn.

– Hozd utánam ezt a turbát Zernyestre! parancsolá a vezéri hang.

«Ahá! Zernyesten lakol! Tehát erdélyi ficsór vagy?»

Ezt jó volt megtudni.

Azután még egy kis érthetetlen szóváltás volt s arra a távozó dobaj
jelenté, hogy a rablók tovamentek.

De azért Boldizsár bá csak nem hagyá el a maga kényelmes buvó helyét.
Azt mondá: fürödjünk, ráérünk; urak dolga ez.

Élt a gyanuperrel, hogy a rablók hátrahagytak egy pár őrt, puskával a
lesben, a ki arra vigyázzon, hogy nem bukkanik-e fel a víz fenekéről az
ezermester? hátha nem halt meg igazán? s csak a köpönyege lett
agyonlőve?

S nagyon jól sejtette. Két martalócz ott hasalt a parti fövény-bokrok
között s ott őrizte a tavat.

Boldizsár bá pedig őrizte a tó fenekét. Hanyatt feküdt és levegőt
pipázott.

Egyszer a két rabló megunta magát s elkezdett ümmögni, vartyogni, mint a
béka.

– Ahá! gondolá Boldizsár bá. Az apádat tedd bolonddá! Azt gondolod, nem
tudja a székely, hogy a béka nem lakik olyan vízben, a hol pisztrángok
laknak?

Ezzel árulták el épen a rablók a jelenlétüket.

Ekkor aztán ő talált ki a számukra valami ravaszságot.

Volt neki egy vitézkötéses süvege nyestből: azt nem vesztette el, mert
jól a fejébe volt szorulva. Leszakította róla a vitézkötést, s aztán
felbocsátá a víz szinére.

A mint a süveg felbukkant, egy lövés eldördült, a víz nagyot csattant a
marék göbecstől, a mi érte.

Erre a közelebb álló martalócz el kezdett kaczagni.

– «Sus ki! de ne lú!» (Tréfásan: süsd ki, de ne lőjj!)

– Nem ember volt, csak süveg, mormogá amaz távolabbról.

– Bizonyosan elvesztette, s most jön fel.

– Pedig szép süveg, nyestből van.

– Piros bársony a csákója.

– Boglárt is látok rajta.

– Ki kellene halászni.

– Tudsz te úszni?

– Tudok, de nem merek; mert még nem próbáltam.

– Gázolj be érte, majd én fogom az üstöködet.

Ráállt a másik.

Ennek az egyiknek még töltve volt a puskája.

Boldizsár bá megvárta szépen, míg az egyik rabló neki vetkőzik, a másik
meg kötelet köt amannak a derekára, hogy így a víz fölött tartsa, s
aztán ketten egyesült erővel kihalászszák a drága szép süveget.

Ekkor aztán Boldizsár bá hirtelen felrugta magát a víz fenekéről,
kiszökött a partra, felkapta a rabló töltött puskáját, a mi a falnak
volt támasztva. Az pedig ijedtében háromfélét gondolt: ha a pajtását
elereszti, az a vizbe fullad, ha megrohanja Boldizsárt, az a kardjával
levágja, ha pedig szaladásra veszi a dolgot, a saját puskájával lelövi.

Az utolsó esett meg rajta.

A parton maradt rablót Boldizsár keresztül lőtte; a másiknak elég volt a
vízbe fulni; azt elvitte a folyó.

Ekkor aztán megcserélte a ruháit az áldozatul esett ellenfelével; a
kardját is annak az oldalára kötötte, evőeszközeit is a csizmaszárába
dugta, a hosszú haját levágta, s aztán beledobta a vízbe.

Maga pedig felvevé a megölt rabló puskáját és szeredását, hálákat adott
az Istennek a megszabadulásért s azzal nyakába vevé az erdőt.

S ugyan okosan tevé, hogy hamarosan végzett: mert alig volt annyira a
sürüben, hogy a fák eltakarták, a midőn látta, hogy jönnek ám fáklyákkal
az eltávozott rablók egész csapattal vissza, és hálókat hoznak magukkal.
Ezek ki akarják őtet halászni! Jó volt felváltatni magát.

Munduka Ravasel pogány káromkodást mivelt, mikor a két otthagyott őrt
nem találta sehol. Esküdözött, hogy mind a kettőt felakasztatja, amint
kézre kapja. Neki is indítá a fáklyásai egy csapatját, hogy hajtsák fel
az erdőt a helybenhagyottakért, s a hol megkapják, mindjárt fára húzzák.

– Ne te né! Bolondok! Mondá Boldizsár bá. Bizony még felakasztanának
tolvajképen! Holott ha meg akartam volna halni, meghalhattam volna én ma
már becsületes emberképen is. Nem úgy verik a czigányt.

Talált is nyomban egy odvas fát, a melybe bizton elbujhaték s annak a
padláslikán keresztül gyönyörködheték benne, hogy verik fel a rablók az
egész erdőt idefenn s hogy húzzák a hálót odalenn a tóban. Egyszer aztán
a halászoknak meg van a nagy örömük: meglelték, a mit kerestek. Ruhája,
kardja ugyanaz, még az ezüstnyelű étszerei is ott vannak a
csizmaszárában. Azt azután nagy riadallal viszik el dorongokra fektetve,
míg lassankint az utolsó fáklyafény is eltünik az erdők sötétjében, s a
kurjantások hangját elnyelik a sziklák.

De azért csak akkor jött elő a rejtekéből, mikor már a bakőzeket
hallotta rigyetni. Most már csakugyan nincs közel emberi fenevad.

Akkor aztán sietett erdőn, bozóton keresztül, a merre a vén Nemere
ormait látta fehérleni a csillagfénynél.

Azt már megtette, hogy életben maradt.

«Hanem ez még kevés! Ez még semmi sem! Oda a turba a kétezer aranynyal.
Oda van Damokos Tamás!»




A CSODATEVŐ KIGYÓKŐ.

A mióta útra kelének a követ urak, Ilka asszony minden este ott nézte a
naplementét a vára erkélyén, ott várta, míg a csillagok feljönnek,
számlálgatta magában, hány nap tölt le? milyen messze járhatnak már?

Egy ilyen szép estén aztán, valami hetednapra az elindulás után, egy
magános lovagot lát bandukolni a vár felé vezető úton, a kinek már
messziről virít a granátszin és karmazsin öltözete. Épen olyan gunyája
van, mint Apor István uramnak. Vajh ki lehet?

A biz épen ide tart a várkapunak.

De nehéz arra ráismerni, mert a homloka és félszeme át van kötve
kendővel, a mi erősen véres, a jobb karja pedig be van bugyolálva
vastagon s a nyakába felkötve.

Még mikor felvezetik a jámbor lovagot az úrasszony elé, akkor sem akar
az ráismerni; még a szavának is alig akar hinni.

– Jaj, édes lelkem hugomasszony, nézze kegyelmed, micsoda állapotban
kerültem haza.

– Az Isten szent szerelmeért! Kegyelmed az, Apor István uram? Mi
történt?

– Jaj ne is kérdezze. Oda vagyok. Össze vagyok kaszabolva. A fejemet
végig hasították, a jobb karomat összezúzták. Egy oláh kovács kötözte
be. Most is zsindely között a jobb karom.

Úgy nyögött a főúr, s olyan vékony hangon beszélt, mint egy leégett
ember.

– Kik? Hol? Micsoda? Kapkodott rémületében a szóhoz Ilka asszony.

– Hát az az átkozott Munduka Ravasel, meg a czimborái. Jaj, minek
mentünk mi Ojtoz felé? Mondtam annak a bolond Czirjéknek, hogy rövidebb
út lesz Gijmesnek. Ő vitt belé a veszedelembe. Meg is lakolt érte.

– Mi történt Czirjék Boldizsárral?

– Meglőtték, a vízbe fojtották. Jaj, nem tudok tovább beszélni. A fejem
oda van. Fektessenek le. Azóta mindig lovon ülök. Mindjárt elájulok.
Majd holnap elmondok mindent.

A szegény megrémült asszony maga is segített a roskadozni készülő
lovagot felkarolni s a szobájába vezetni. Maga húzta le neki a csizmáit;
elkészíté a feje alját, ahová nagy keserves nyögések között lefekteté a
halálra sebesültet; azután sietett a laboratoriumába: a rendes házi
asszonynak abban az időben kellett ilyent tartani a háznál; mert nem
volt ám akkor se patika, se tilógus egész Kolozsvárig, magának a házi
asszonynak kellett érteni a mithridatok és theriákok készítéséhez. Ebben
járatos is volt Ilka asszony, s a mi csak életserkentő szer van a
világon, azt mind előhordta a nyavalyás főúrnak, akit egész éjjel őrizni
és ápolni kellett, mert a sebláz következtében egyre félrebeszélt és
hadakozni akart: rablókra kiabált és az ágyat rugdalta. Reggelre azonban
a hétféle balzsamoktól és julepektől lehetetlen volt meg nem gyógyulnia;
úgy, hogy felébredvén, nyögdécselő szóval, meg-megszaggatva a
fulladozástól, elbeszélheté Ilka asszonynak az egész történetet,
elejétől végig, úgy, a hogy igazán megesett. Az ojtozi nagy vízfogónál
hogy rohanta meg háromszáz hajdemákkal Munduka Ravasel az ő kiséretüket,
mely vitéz ellentállás után keresztülvágta magát vissza Ojtoz felé. Ő
maga a tutor úr négy hajdemákot a pokolra küldött, mikor a jobb karját
összezúzták, akkor a balkezébe kapta a kardot, úgy harczolt tovább.
Hanem a nyomorult Czirjék az ott veszett, mert keresztüllőtték s aztán
beledobták a vízfogó tóba.

– Hát a pénz hová lett? kérdezé rémledezve Ilka asszony.

– A pénz bizony! sápítozék a sebesült úr. Hisz az a legnagyobb
veszedelem! Mindig mondtam annak a Czirjéknek, hogy ne a maga lova
nyergére kösse a turbát, hanem az enyimre. Ime, én visszahoztam volna.
De makacs volt; nem engedett. S ime ez lett a vége.

– Elvették a pénzt? Jézus, szent megváltóm! Mi lesz az uramból, ha nem
viszik oda érte a váltságot!

– Dejszen, galambom, hugomasszony; a felől legyen kegyelmed nyugodt.
Annak a pénznek elő kell kerülni! Ha az utolsó bogláromat eladom is; ha
úgy koldulom is össze a Damokos Tamás váltságának ki kell kerülni.
Eladunk mindent: gulyát, nyájat, még a rézmozsarakat is a bástyákról; de
a Tamás váltságának össze kell kerülni. Mihelyt én az ágyat elhagyhatom:
esküszöm minden szentekre, hogy ez lesz a legelső dolgom. Ne essék
kegyelmed kétségbe. Másodszor nem rabolják azt el tőlem.

De bizony nagyon is kétségbe volt esve Ilka asszony, a kezeit tördelve
és zokogva járt fel s alá a szobáiban, felnyitotta a szekrényeit,
halomra hányta a köntöseit; az arany-ezüst kincseit: még ma elviszi mind
Brassóba, eladja a görögnek. Egyébre sem gondolt, mint hogy az elrabolt
váltságdíjat a férjének újra kiteremtse, ha egy szál köntösben marad is
miatta.

Dél felé azonban már annyira magához tért a sebesült úr, hogy egy
gyámolító inas támogatása mellett átbiczeghetett az ebédlőterembe.
Igazán: a pogánynak is megeshetett volna a szive, olyan nagyon tudott
nyögni.

– Nincs nyugtom az ágyban! mondá Ilka asszonynak, a ki gyöngéd
aggodalommal feddé, hogy minek kelt még föl lázár létére? Nincsen
maradásom, a míg hozzá nem foghatok annak a váltságdíjnak a
visszavivásához, a mit az a szerencsétlen Czirjék elveszített.

Ilka asszonynak azonban volt rá gondja, hogy a lábbadozó számára egy kis
jó betegnek való csirkebecsináltat készítsen, a mi annak nagyon jól is
eshetett.

– Két nap óta egy falatot sem vettem magamhoz! édes lelkem,
hugomasszony. Ha egy szegény oláhasszony meg nem szán egy harapás
mamaligával, éhen is vesztem volna. Mert mindenütt a hegyi útakon
kellett menekülnöm a rablók elől. Szegény Czirjék! Mondtam neki, hogy ne
menjünk Ojtoz felé. Ő félt legjobban a zsiványoktól s ő vezetett a
fészkükbe. Csak már a pénzt ne vitte volna magával! Őtet magát bánná a
szösz!

– De én bizony sajnálom szegény Boldizsár bátyámat, mondá Ilka asszony.
Nekem nagyon kedves emberem volt, meg a szegény uramnak is. Úgy hozzá is
vagyok szokva, hogy ime most is feledtemben neki is ide terítettem az
asztalhoz, mindennapi szokás szerint. Szegény Boldizsár bá, ő sem iszik
hát többet a kedves kupájából.

– Biz az már eleget ivott az Ojtoz vizéből. Halak prédája lett.

S még részletesebben elmondá, a mit látott, Ilka asszonynak; hogy annak
már a hidegtől borsózott az egész teste.

Jó, hogy már felhozták azt a becsináltat.

Ilka asszony maga kötötte fel az asztalkendőt a tutor úr nyakába, sőt
még a csirkehúst is feldarabolta a tányérjában, mivelhogy az a jobb
kezét nem használhatta. Egy kis jó aszúborral is megkinálgatta: hadd
jőjjön erőhöz. Semmi sem olyan jó orvosság a nagy betegnek, mint a
tiszta jó bor. S minthogy a tutor úr nagyon beteg volt, annálfogva
nagyokat is ivott ebből az orvosságból. Meg is használt neki. A két
csirkéből főzött becsináltat mind elfogyasztotta. De még a leve is
nagyon jó ám annak: a drága sáfrányos, petreselymes lé. Azt kanállal
szokták megenni. Csakhogy az ember nagyon ügyetlen a balkezével, mikor
kanállal dolgozik, mind félreöntözi a levet. Ilka asszony megszánta a
gyámoltalant, fogta az egyik kezébe a tányért, a másikba a kanalat, s
gyöngédeden megetette kanállal a kedves beteget, amitől az csak úgy
éledt szemlátomást.

Hanem egyszer csak nagyot csuklik s hátrakapja a fejét az etetett lázár.

Ilka asszony azt hitte, tán egy csirkecsont akadt a torkán.

Nem biz az. Hanem amint Ilka asszony megfordult, s hátratekintett az
asztal felé, hát ott látta Czirjék Boldizsárt ülni a szokott helyén,
ahol fel volt számára terítve.

– Ejnye de hideg van odakinn! monda Boldizsár bá a tenyereit dörzsölve.
Ugyancsak fuj a Nemere.

Ilka asszony csak kiejtett tányért, kanalat a kezéből.

– Minden jó lélek dicséri az urat!

– Ámen. Mondá rá a jó lélek.

– Boldizsár bá! Kegyelmed élő testben van itt?

– Csak hozzák azt a tokányt, majd meglátod, hogy nem vagyok lélek.

De bizony úgy megörült ennek a nyilatkozatnak Ilka asszony, hogy minden
tartózkodást félre téve, odarohant Boldizsár bához és a nyakába borult.

– Oh csakhogy kegyelmedet visszahozta a jóságos úr Isten! Hogy nem ölték
agyon a zsiványok.

– No – egy kicsit – talán mégis, dünnyögé Boldizsár bá s nagy flegmával
elkezdett a késsel, villával dobolni a czintányéron.

Hanem Apor István uram háromféle szint is váltott ez idő alatt s alig
akart helyrejönni a csuklásból.

– Hát nem lőtték kegyelmedet keresztül a zsiványok? kérdezé Ilka
asszony; a hogy Apor István urambátyám látta.

– De ugyan keresztül lőttek, édes mézem.

– S azután meg a vízbe is fojtották.

– Az is igaz. Úgy van, a hogy István komám látta. Belém lőttek tíz
golyóbist, s belé is fojtottak az Ojtoz tavába. Hanem azért se annyi
ólmot nem ettem, se annyi vizet nem ittam rá, hogy most pogányul éhes és
szomjas ne lennék. Azért csak hozzad azt a sóbanfőttet, tálbansültet,
meg egy jó veder mézesmálit, hadd felejtsem el az én bajaimat. Látom
bizony, hogy Están komám is kiheverte már a magáét. No engem, fogadom,
még etetni sem kell, mint ő kegyelmét.

Apor István összeszedte magát az első meghökkenéséből s látva, hogy
Boldizsár bá milyen igazi parasztikus mohósággal tehénkedik neki a
felhozott ételnek, bele kezdett helyezkedni a kényelmetlen állapotba,
hogy vele szemközt ülve maradjon, s a nyilazó szemeinek gunyos
tekintetét nyugodtan kiállja.

Ilka asszony tétova tekintettel nézegetett hol az egyik, hol a másik
férfinak az arczára, mintha kezdene a kettő közül valamelyiknek a
szavában kételkedni. De még nem határozta el magát.

Boldizsár bá pedig sokkal praktikusabb ember volt, minthogy egy olyan
thémát discussióba hozzon, aminek bizonyára asztalbontás lesz a vége;
(minek előtte az ebédnek vége volna.) Csak hadd folyjon le elébb a
lakoma.

Ilka asszony ugyan nagy aggodalommal járogatott körülötte, kérdezgetve
tőle, hogy hol van meglőve? nehogy a fájós helyén érinteni találja a
kezével. Talán a mellén, vagy az oldalán? De Boldizsár bá mindenre csak
azt mondta, hogy «ühüm», a míg a szája tele volt.

Mikor aztán az utolsó falatot is lenyomtatta a kupa borral, akkor
hátraveté magát a székében s elkezdte a török kése hegyével a hatalmas
szép egészséges fogait piszkálni.

– Hát biz ez mind úgy történt, a hogy Están komám elbeszélé. A czudar
hajdemákok elébb összelövöldözének, s azután a vízbe dobának. Nem is
lett volna soha belőlem élő ember, ha ezt a gyűrűt az apám rám nem
hagyta volna, a kinek még a szép apja örökölte ezt a hires Rapsonnétól;
a ki nagy tündérasszony volt. Ennek a köve egy kigyókő! Nézzék
kegyelmetek. Párja ez annak a kigyókőnek, a mit Bethlen Gábor dicső
fejedelmünk a testamentumában különösen felemleget. Minden szerencséjét
annak köszönhette. Az ilyent a kigyók fujják a királyuknak a fejére, s a
ki ezt elkaphatja a kigyó-királytól, csodákat mivelhet vele. Már a nagy
Theofrastus ismerte ennek a felséges tulajdonságait. Az ilyen kigyókő
minden sebeket begyógyít, rögtön és azonnal: az eltört csontokat
összeforrasztja s a golyókat a sebből kihúzza. Ime élő példa vagyok én
magam itt. Még csak meg sem látszik rajtam, hol lőttek keresztül? De még
ez nem minden. Még arra is használ a kigyókő, hogy ha ezt egy vízbe
esett ember a szájába veszi: soha bele nem fullad a vízbe, ha egész nap
a fenekén hever is: mert ez a kigyókő annyi életessentiát izzad ki
magából, hogy a lelkét visszatartja. Ennek a segítségével maradtam élve.
Így szabadultam meg a halálos sebektől, vizbefulladástól.

Hát biz ezt hitte, a ki akarta. De ellene mondani senkinek sem vala
kedve. Ha lódit, ő lássa!

– Bizony olyan csodatevő kő ez, bizonyozék Boldizsár bá, tovább
magasztalva a gyűrűje varázserejét. Kiállja ez a próbát akárhányszor.
Merek rá fogadni, hogy ha ezzel a kigyókővel megérintem a szörnyüséges
nagy mély vágást, a mit kegyelmed kapott, Están komám, a nagy
dulakodásban, egybe összeforr az, a helye sem marad ott.

Apor István most vette csak észre, hogy micsoda veszedelmes tréfával
szándékszik őt megkeríteni Boldizsár bá s haragos kemény hangon, mely az
eddigi nyögdécselő nyöszörgéstől nagyon is elütött, eléje kezde
vagdalni.

– Hagyja kend! Maradjon kend azzal az ostoba babonás hitével távol a
testemtől. Felvilágosodott magyar emberek a XVII-ik században az ilyen
bolondságot már repudiálják! Kigyókirályok nincsenek. Kigyókövek
csodaerejében keresztyén ember nem hisz többé.

– Micsoda? Kiálta felugorva helyéről Boldizsár bá, s áthajolva az
asztalon az átelleneséhez. Ezt akarja kegyelmed eltagadni? okosabb akar
kegyelmed lenni a mi fejedelmünknél, dicsőült Bethlen Gábornál, a ki
igaz kálvinista fejedelem volt? Meg akarja kegyelmed czáfolni Hatvani
professort, a nagy astrologust? Látott már kegyelmed igazi kigyókövet?
Valóságos igazit, a milyen az enyim? Ezt nézze meg jól!

De a míg gyűrűjét az öklével odatartotta Apor István uramnak az orra
alá, egyszer csak lerántotta a fejéről a véres köteléket, a nagy
sebtapasszal együtt, s ime – azon a magas homlokon nem látszott de még
csak egy karczolás sem.

– No látja kegyelmed, hogy milyen csodát mivel az én kigyókövem. Hogy
begyógyította kegyelmednek azt a nagy vágást a homlokán.

De már ekkor a főúrnak nem volt több tréfálni való kedve. Kirugta a
széket maga alól, s most már aztán a jobb karjáról is lerántá a
zsindelyes burkolást s nagyot ütött az öklével az asztalra.

– No lám! Még az összetört karját is hogy meggyógyítottam kegyelmednek a
kigyókövemmel! dicsekedék Boldizsár bá.

Ilka asszonynak ekkor nyiltak ki egyszerre a szemei. Végignézett
villámló két szemével Apor Istvánon. De olyan nézés volt az, a mi
túltett minden fegyveradta seben: megölő, lesujtó tekintet egy asszony
szeméből, a kinek olyan fegyvert adott a természet, a mi ellen semmi sem
védelmez.

Apor István látta, hogy le van róla rántva minden álarcz, s a
tettenkapott kalandor fogcsikorgató dühével rázta a felemelt öklét
Boldizsár felé fordulva, a ki csendes nevetéssel tekinte szemébe. Azzal
kirohant a teremből; de az ajtóból visszafordulva, rekedtes hangon
hörgé:

«Megkeserüli még ezt ez a ház!»

*

El is vágtatott még abban az órában a négylovas hintaján, a melyen
idejött, minden búcsúvétel nélkül: rengeteg haraggal és
megszégyenüléssel.




A NÉGYEZER ÖZVEGYASSZONY OSTROMA.

– Most már mindent elhiszek erről az emberről! Lihegé Ilka asszony,
reszketve a haragtól. Még kanállal eteté magát velem! Hogy forrna a
torkán, mint Judásnak a mártott falat! Most már szentül hiszem, hogy
összeczimborált a rablókkal!

– No, hogy épen megosztozott volna Mundukával, azt nem akarom állítani,
hanem hogy ő igazította utunkba, arra a fejemet teszem, egyenesen azért,
hogy szegény Damokos Tamás ott veszszen a rabságban s te özvegyen
maradj.

– Mit teszek én most? Mit teszek én most? Töprenkedék Ilka asszony,
kinek a lelki tusakodásban elsápadt az arcza s mégis veríték gyöngyözött
rajta.

– Bizony nem tudom én édes hugomasszony. Vége az ezermesterségemnek. Az
ezeregyediknél pauzál az eszem. Mert azt nem teszem, hogy panaszra
menjek. Hová? Brassóba? a szindikushoz? inkább kis kutyát fésülni.

– Hát én tudom, hogy mit teszek!

– Ugyan mondd meg; testestül-lelkestül segítségedre leszek benne az
utolsó körömszakadtáig.

– Köszönöm. Nem kell nekem ehhez férfi. Egy férfi sem kell hozzá.

– Akkor furcsa munka lesz az!

– Mert az Isten büntetése ez rajtam valóban mostan. Azért, hogy olyan
kevély voltam; olyan elbizakodott voltam. Csak a magam bajára gondoltam,
a másé után nem kérdezősködtem. Azt mondtam, nekem módom van, sok
pénzem, ime én kiválthatom könnyen az uramat; a többi szegény árva
özvegy ám lássa, mikor hogyan jut a maga legkedvesebbjéhez. Ime
megalázott az Isten! Ledobott oda a többi özvegyasszonyok közé, a kiknek
nincs miből előteremteni a rabságban sinylő uraik váltságát. Olyan
lettem, mint az uram szegény társainak szegény asszonykái. Hát én most
neki indulok és összeszedem valamennyi özvegyasszony van
Erdélyországban, a kinek az ura rabságban sinylődik: magam köré gyűjtöm
egész tábor számra, felviszem magammal, a hol az ország rendei tanácsot
tartanak, az országgyülésbe: berontok közéjük a tanácsterembe, ki nem
jövök onnan, míg nem határoznak; megszállom a fejedelem palotáját,
ostrom alá veszem: ha rabságra adta férjeinket a fejedelem és az ország,
most váltsa is ki őket egyszerre az ország és a fejedelem!

Boldizsár bá csak a falnak esett elámulásában.

– Oh te csodatevő asszonyi lélek! Milyen nagy világosság lakozik te
benned! Hát persze, hogy ez a legegyszerűbb dolog: olyan egyszerű ez,
mint a Columbus tojása. A kiket rabságba ejtett az ország és a
fejedelem, váltsa ki az ország és a fejedelem! De, hogy mindjárt tegye
és ne halogassa, rontson rájok rögtön egy asszonyi tábor: egy egész
hadsereg a fogoly vitézek gyászbaborult özvegyasszonyaiból. Nagy
gondolat ám ez! Soha én ezzel a magam tökkolop fejével erre a nagy szóra
rá nem jöttem volna! Ez lesz jó! Ezt tedd meg! Neked sikerül az. Igazad
van benne! Nem kell ide férfi! A férfi mind gyáva olyan nehéz csata
előtt, a minek az asszony neki megy, s áttöri! Ne hallgass senkire:
semmi csititásra. Bölcs dolog az, a mit művelsz. Ne hátrálj; ne engedj
senkit szóhoz jutni. A ki itt okosan akar beszélni, az a bolond. Te
beszélj, te követelj, csinálj csetepatét, a mekkorát csak tudsz, olyan
patáliát, hogy hét országra szóljon! S a míg azt nem mondják rá:
«deliberatum», ne tágíts helyedről. Ne ijedj meg senkitől! Senki haragos
orczájától!

– Bizony nem én! Még a fejedelemtől sem! Azt meg fogja látni!

– Fogj hozzá; de mindjárt. Kezdd el itt Csikszeredán: ma heti vásár van.
Eredj ki a piaczra a trombitásoddal és fuvasd el vele a «háromszáz
özvegy tánczát» s buzdítsd fel szavaddal az asszonynépet. Mihelyt egy
pár százan lesztek, indulj meg végig a székely falvakon, városokon: úgy
fog nőni az a sereg, mint a hógörgeteg. Elég lesz az Deés városát
megszállni, fogadom! De hogy mégis tudjad, hogy ha egyszer ottan
lesztek, mit követeljetek: halld meg a tanácsom. Mert minden munkánál az
az első dolog, hogy az ember megtalálja a fogantyúját, a minél
megragadja. Aztán az is régi igazmondás, hogy «Kutya ugat, pénz beszél».
Hiába minden decretum, deliberatum, articulus, pecsétes levél, ha nincs
meg hozzá a felvehető pénz. De hát megvan. Azért tartsad eszedben. A mi
dicsőült fejedelmünk, Bethlen Gábor, az ő emlékezetes nagylelkű
testamentomában a sok egyéb legátumokon kívül magának Erdélyországnak,
rendkívüli szükségekre nyolczvanezer aranyat hagyományozott. Ez a pénz
ott fekszik az özvegy fejedelemnőnél, Lorántfy Zsuzsánna asszonynál, ki
ezt a kerek summát mind ekkorig nem adta ki az ország rendeinek, azt
vetve ellen, hogy hiszen nincsenek jelen azok a rendkívüli szükségek az
országban, a miket a bölcs fejedelem czélzásképen előre megjelzett. No
hát most már itt van az a «rendkívüli szükség». Annyi sok tízezer
magyarnak rabságba esése bizony nevezhető annak. Ezt követeljed hát.
Parancsolja meg az országgyülés a fejedelemnek és az özvegy
fejedelemnőnek… (igen is: parancsolja meg! mert az országgyülés az úr, a
fejedelem pedig csak az ország választott első tisztviselője), hogy a
Bethlen Gábor nyolczvanezer aranyát azonnal adják ki. Azt is pedig
egyenesen a török szultán tihájának a kezébe tegyék le, nehogy
kézen-közön még azt is elmundukázza valaki s akkor egyszerre az egész
elfogott erdélyi sereget, vezérestől, kapitányostól mind haza fogják
bocsátani. Egyébről ne is hagyj magaddal diskurálni. Igazságodban vagy,
helyes úton jársz; győzni fogsz. Mentül elébb indítsd meg, a mit
kigondoltál. A mit asszony kigondolt, asszony megcselekszi!

Ilkának sem kellett több buzdítás. Rögtön lovat nyergeltetett, magához
vette az udvari trombitását s egyedül, minden más kiséret nélkül
átlovagolt a csikszeredai vásártérre, a hol épen akkor sokadalom vala.

Ott a templom előtt megállva, megparancsolá a trombitásának, hogy fujja
el a «háromszáz özvegyasszony tánczát».

Hires nóta volt ez akkoriban; akként keletkezett, hogy egy aranybánya
összedőlt s egyszerre háromszáz bányamunkást temetett el halottul.
Mielőtt a nagy szerencsétlenségnek hire futamodott volna, a bánya
tulajdonosa, gazdag magyar főúr, pompás lakomát rendezett a kastélyában
s arra felhivatta a háromszáz asszonyt, a kiknek a férjeik ott vesztek a
bánya düledékei alatt, s fényesen megtraktálta őket; mikor aztán már jó
kedvök lett a sertül, bortul, akkor megfuvatta a trombitásával az új
nótát, a minek a láb alá való hangjaira a menyecskék tánczra kerekedtek,
s egymással párjában ugyan rúgták a port. Mikor aztán legvigabban
járták, a palota ura elkiáltja magát: «no még soh’se láttam háromszáz
özvegyasszonyt egy rakáson ilyen vigan tánczolni».

Erre aztán egyszerre nagy sírás, jajgatás lett az elébbi víg
vihánczolásból: a szegény asszonyok a táncz közben tudták meg, hogy
özvegyek lettek!

Kegyetlen tréfa volt biz az attól a főúrtól, másféle mulatságot is
találhatott volna ki magának. Ilyen volt az idő és az erkölcs.

Hanem a nóta maga elterjedt egész Erdélyországban s mindenütt úgy
hívták, hogy a «háromszáz özvegy táncza».

Hej mikor ezt a nótát meghallották a rab székelyek asszonyai, de nem
kellett nekik semmi magyarázat hozzá! Ilka asszony ugyan hatalmas
dictiót fundált ki magában, a mit elmondjon az összegyült nép előtt. De
nem lett abból semmi. Csak odáig tudta vinni, hogy «az én lelkem uram
tatár rabságában…» ott egyszerre zokogásba tört át, s arra aztán
valamennyi asszony mind rákezdte karénekben a sírást; s a sírás közben,
mintha valamennyi mind egyszerre kitalálta volna azt a nagy szót, a mit
el akart közöttük mondani Damokos Tamásné, sűrűn kiáltották: «menjünk!
menjünk fel a dietára! a fejedelemhez! vezessen a főkapitányné
asszonyom!»

Jámbor öregek, a férfi-székelyek oda furakodtak közéjük, hogy szép
szóval, gyönge erőszakkal megmarasszák őket; de nem bírtak velük: «nem
kell közénk férfi! Maradjanak kendtek itt a sutban! Jöjjön velünk, a
hány özvegyasszony!»

Utoljára még a trombitásnak a kezéből is kikapták a tárogatóját s azt is
kilökték a körükből, hogy még ennyi férfi se maradjon köztük; volt ott
egy menyecske, a ki nagyon jól értett a tárogatófuváshoz, a háromszáz
özvegy tánczának a nótáját is tudta, ez lesz a trombitásuk.

S aztán megindult a lavina. Lóháton és szekéren. Minden falu, minden
város szaporította a sereget, mikor Deés felé közeledtek, már akkor egy
tábor volt a Damokosné vezette asszonynép. Úgy, hogy mikor annak a
közeledtét meglátták a deési öreg toronyból, félreverték a harangot,
hogy jön az ellenség. Iszonyú volt az a porfelleg, a mi a tömérdek
szekér, s az előre vágtató lovas asszonynép nyomában támadt. A
fejedelemnek jelenték a dolgot. Ő menten kiküldött egy lovashadnagyot
egynéhány huszárral, hogy menjenek előre s tudják meg, hogy mi az? A
hadnagy útban találta az özvegyasszonyok lóhátas előcsapatját; fekete
zászlójuk volt, a végére békós láncz akasztva. Kérdésére nem egyen, de
tizen-huszan felelték: «megyünk a fejedelemre, követelni a rabokat! Ha
elvesztette, hozza vissza!»

A hadnagy lóhalálában vágtatott vissza a fejedelemhez, s elmondá nagy
hült szájjal, hogy ugyan jön ám egy egész hadsereg a fejedelem nyakára,
követelni, hogy a tatár rabságra esett harczosokat váltsa ki azonnal.
Csak azt felejtette el hozzátenni, hogy ez a sereg csupa asszony. Vagy
talán azt hitte, hogy csak az előcsapat az, s a mi hátul jön, az mind
férfi.

Nosza a fejedelem sem vette tréfára a dolgot, hirtelen felpakoltatott;
Deés városa nyitott város; azt nem lehetett megvédelmezni, úgy
elvágtatott onnan, hogy meg sem állt Szamosujvárig.

Mikor aztán a rendek megtudták, hogy a fejedelem odább állt, maguk is
azonnal, minden határozathozatal nélkül, befogattak a szekereikbe s
utána siettek a fejedelemnek.

Damokosné, meg az özvegyek tábora már csak a hült helyüket találta
Deésen.

«No jól van! mondá Ilka asszony; előlünk ugyan a világból ki nem futtok!
Valahol majd csak utolérünk benneteket».

Ott Deésen tehát szépen kipihenték magukat; a város népe ellátta őket
minden jóval, s aztán az ottani asszonyok is hozzájuk csatlakoztak, a
kiknek a férjeit elvitte a tatár.

Ez alatt a fejedelem és a diæta legalább időt nyert Szamosujváron
elhelyezkedni.

Rákóczy György beült a várba, a minek akkoriban még védhető sánczai is
voltak, a Szamossal összekötve. (Most ez az állami börtön, hétszáz
rablógyilkos és más gonosztevő számára!)

Hanem a diæta számára nem volt a várban hely; ott nincsenek nagyobb
termek.

Ellenben volt ott egy igen nagy uradalmi pajta: azt be lehetett rendezni
országháznak. Egy kis radikális takarítás, a falak kimeszelése, a
gerendák lepókhálózása után egészen alkalmassá lett az téve rendeltetése
czéljára. Az ablakain ugyan nem voltak üvegtáblák, s annálfogva
keresztül-kasul járhatott rajtuk a szél; hanem a két végét, a mi pajták
szokása szerint nyitva volt, (hogy a terhes szekerek által s
kijárhassanak), alul bedeszkázták hevenyében; felül azért csak nyitva
maradt. Egyéb baj aztán nem volt, mint hogy az ezer meg ezer veréb, a mi
már ideszokott, nem szünt meg csiripelni odafenn a házban a tanácskozás
folyamata alatt; s a protonotárius úrnak ugyan vigyáznia kellett, hogy
az egerek meg ne egyék a jegyzőkönyvét, minekelőtte hitelesítve van. Egy
hosszú asztalt leczövekelt lábakra végig nyújtóztattak a középen a
rendek számára, annak a felső végéhez T betű formára egy másik asztalt
ragasztottak, a mi a fejedelem tanácsurainak volt a helye. Rédey Ferencz
uramnak, az elnöknek, karosszék jutott, a tanácsurak szalmaszékeket
kaptak, a rendek beérték lóczával.

De mind jó ez, ha bölcseség van hozzá! A Rákoson még ennyi sem volt.
Mégis milyen jól ment minden!

Hanem az volt a nagy baj, hogy a fejedelem betegnek jelenté magát. Az
udvari orvosa, doctor Reineckius azt mondta, hogy a szive van meghülve s
azt mással, mint porrátört csörgőkigyó-szívvel nem lehet felmelegíteni;
az pedig csak Bécsben kapható. Az egykori krónikairó ellenben azt
mondja, hogy biz az csak afféle «febris scholaris» volt. Mikor a gyerek
nem tudja a leczkéjét, azt mondja, a hideg leli.

Bizony pedig a jó Rákóczy György ugyancsak nem tudott azokra a
kérdésekre megfelelni, a miket az ország rendei hozzá intéztek.

Az első kérdés mindjárt az volt, hogy ugyan miért csinálta az
országgyülés tudta és beleegyezése nélkül azt a szerencsétlen
hadjáratot? Ki vette rá, hogy hadsereggel menjen Lengyelországba koronát
keresni?

Hát erre bizony a fejedelem nem tudott egyebet felelni, mint azt, hogy
meghült a szive.

A második kérdés meg az volt, hogy mi módon fogja már most az elfogott
tömérdek rab hazafit a tatárok lánczaiból kiszabadítani?

Erre a fejedelem még rosszabb betegséget vallott be: azt, hogy üres a
cassája.

A jó mulatság bekoronázására aztán még ott ült a nyakukon a szultán
tihajája, Akmet bég, s a tatár khán követe, Dája-Lot-Ali bég, a kik
mindennap kétszer bekopogtattak, hogy letették-e már a rendek Rákóczy
Györgyöt a fejedelmi székből? Ezek másról hallani sem akartak. Ha nem
teszik le ezt a «lázadót», a ki a felséges szultánnak nem
engedelmeskedik, jön az egész tatárság egyfelől, a budai basa másfelől,
az erdélyi népséget a lovai lába alá gázolni. Válaszszatok magatok közül
egy «emberséges embert!» Ez volt a mindennapi szavuk.

És a magyar urak naponkint nem tehettek egyebet, mint hogy a két bégnek
hol egy czifra kaftányt, hol egy szép aranyos billikomot küldtek
ajándékba, hogy csak tűrtőztessék a haragjukat. Mindennap ujra be
kellett a szájukat csukni vagy aranynyal, vagy ezüsttel.

Megérkezék azonban Damokos Tamásné az özvegyek táborával Szamos-Ujvár
alá. Az örmény asszonyok még feleúton eléjük vonultak egész processióval
a városból. Mikor felvonultak a Szamos mentén, egész tábor volt a
sokaságuk, minden falunak a maga fekete zászlója.

Azon a reggelen pedig különös csodatünemény jelent meg az égen: mint ez
a krónikában fel vagyon jegyezve. Az igazi nap körül egy fényes
szivárványba játszó tág udvar öblösült s annak a karimáján, délponton és
a két horizonon három ellennap támadt. A valódi nap ép oly sápadtnak
látszott, mint a három naprém, hogy puszta szemmel a tányérjába láttak,
s az egész ég nem volt kék, hanem szürke. Sokáig bámulta minden nép ezt
az égi csodát. Gonosz jövendőket jósoltak belőle. Hogy négy fejedelem
fog lenni egyszerre Erdélyországban: (egyik sápadtabb, mint a másik!) s
nagy vérontás, országromlás lesz a vége.

S be is teljesült e rossz jóslat; pedig ez nagyobb csoda volt a földön,
mint az a másik odafenn az égen.

Talán ez égi tüneménynek a bámulata okozta, hogy az oda irányzott
figyelem miatt ezt a kisebb tüneményt alig vette észre valaki, a mint
egy csupa asszonyokból álló tábor körülfog egy kerített várat, bezárja
azt szekérsánczaival, mintha a leghadismerőbb megszálló ellenség volna.

Csak azután, hogy az országházzá átalakult pajta előtt megjelenék egy
száz főre menő küldöttség, mind az ország legelőkelőbb
özvegyasszonyaiból válogatva, kiknek némelyike még a kis ölbeli
gyermekét is elhozta, kezdék észrevenni az «urak», hogy idelenn a földön
is történik valami. Kemény Simon (az elfogott Kemény János fővezér
nagyobbik fia) mint háznagya a diætának, találkozék legelébb az
asszonyságokkal, s azt kérdezé tőlük, hogy hová igyekeznek? Az asszonyok
vezetője, Damokos Tamásné választ adott neki, mondván:

– A diætára jöttünk, a fogságra vitt rabok kiszabadítását szorgalmazni!

– Azt ugyan helyesen teszik, mondá a nyájas levente. Tessék besétálni.
Odabenn tanakodnak már a rendek.

Azzal bebocsátá őket mind a százat. A pajta előterében volt egy
korlátokkal elzárt rész a hallgatóság számára, ellátva lóczákkal; azokra
a hölgyek szépen letelepedének s kezdetben igen csendesen viselték
magukat.

Ellenben a többi asszonynépet a darabontok az ajtóból visszaterelték.
Azok aztán a pajta mind a két oldalán neki feküvének a deszkázatnak s a
deszkák hasadékain át hallgatták és szemlélék a diætán történendőket:
mások pedig felkapaszkodának a pajta ablakaiba s onnan dugták be a
fejeiket, úgy, hogy minden ablak tele volt kiváncsi ábrázatokkal.

Eleinte az uraságoknak tetszett az nagyon, hogy ilyen szép auditoriumuk
van. Igyekeztek is kitenni magukért ékes szónoklatokkal.

Az öregebbik Ebéni ott vette fel a szót, a hol Deésen elhagyá;
követelve, hogy a fejedelem adjon választ arra a kérdésre, ki birta rá,
mi oka volt rá, hogy a szerencsétlen lengyelországi hadjáratba
beleugorjon? Igen keze ügyébe eső orátori fordulat volt tőle, a midőn
odamutatva a karzaton megjelent gyászoló özvegyekre, azoknak keserves
szenvedéseit megható szavakban ecsetelé, az özvegyek hangos zokogása
mellett.

E vehemens szónoklat hatása alatt a rendek azonnal határozatot hoztak,
hogy a fejedelem még egyszer szólíttassék fel categorice, hogy feleljen
meg erre a kérdésre; a határozatot pedig sietve vigye fel hozzá Barcsai
Ákos, rontson be a fejedelem szobájába, s ha beteg is, ha nem is, adjon
választ, ne tartsa a világot véka alatt!

Barcsay Ákos bement a várba, az alatt az urak, több ismerősre akadván az
asszonyságok között, azokkal eldiscurálgatának; mikor aztán Barcsay Ákos
visszajött, ismét a helyeikre ülének.

Barcsay mély csendesség közepett elmondá, hogy a fejedelem izenete ez: Ő
a lengyelországi hadjáratot egyenesen a fejedelmi tanács tudtával és
beleegyezésével kezdte meg.

No iszen támadt erre nagy patália! A hosszú asztalnál ülő rendek mind
felugrálának, s huszan is kiabáltak egyszerre, az ökleikkel fenyegetve a
felső asztalnál ülő tanácsosokat, mindent elmondtak azokra, csak azt
nem, hogy derék emberek.

Az asszonyok ezt a jelenetet csak hüledezve nézték, mind a korlátok
mögül, mind az ablakokból: azt hivék, hogy most mindjárt darabokra
aprítják az urak a tanácsosokat.

Nagy sokára szóhoz tudott végre jutni az elnök: Rédey Ferencz uram. Mind
a két kezével megüté a mellét, így kiálta:

– Isten engem úgy segéljen, hogy senki én velem e hadjáratnak semmiféle
okát nem közölte!

Ez nagy szó! Mikor egy puritán életű ember azt mondja: Isten úgy
segéljen! Nem volt ez akkoriban útféli szólásforma.

– Esküdjenek meg a többi tanácsurak is! Követelték az urak a hosszú
asztalnál.

S a tanácsos uraknak egyenkint fel kellett állni és éghez emelt kézzel
megesküdni, hogy egyikükkel sem közölt senki egy szót is a hadjárat
okairól.

Ilka asszony és a többi özvegyek kezdték ezt a dolgot már egy kissé
unalmasnak találni s fészkelődtek a helyeiken.

– Hát akkor miért adták a tanácsurak a beleegyezésüket a hadjárathoz?
kiáltá Ebéni.

Rédey Ferencz, sarokba lévén szorítva, kénytelen volt kirukkolni a
válaszszal.

– Hát énnekem Kemény János, a fővezér azt mondotta, hogy igen fontos
okok parancsolják a lengyelországi hadjárást; de azok annyira titokban
tartandók, hogy ha az ő saját inge tudna felőlük valamit, még azt is a
tűzbe dobná.

«Nekünk is mind azt mondta!» bizonyozának a többi tanácsurak a felső
asztalnál.

Erre aztán megújulva tört ki a vihar idelenn!

«Meg kell notázni Kemény Jánost! Számüzessék! Tűztől-víztől
eltiltassék!»

A nagy harag nem csillapodott le elébb, mint mikor a protonotarius
felmutatá az összehajtott ív papirt, tudatva a rendekkel, hogy ime
készen van a «nota» Kemény János ellen. Számüzetik Erdélyből örökre.

Vigye fel a notát Barcsay Ákos azonnal a fejedelemhez aláirás végett. Ha
beteg is, ha nem is, ezt alá kell írnia.

A míg azonban Barcsay odajárt, berohantak a terembe Kemény János két
legény fiai, s az idősebb Simon, kirántva kardját, neki hevült arczczal
kiálta a rendekre:

– Én az apám becsületében gázolni nem hagyok. A ki az én apámat
hazaárulónak meri nevezni, mind kihivom egy szál kardra. Csunyaság,
léhaság egy távollevőre kenni minden hibát; a ki nem jöhet ide magát
kitisztázni! Azt itélni számüzetésre, ki maga is ott sinylődik tatár
Krimiában rablánczokra verve.

De már ennek az asszonyok is mind pártjára keltek. «Csunyaság! Gyalázat!
A rabvezért itélni el! A helyett, hogy kiszabadítanák!»

A rendek alig tudták lecsillapítani ezt a lármát, s a közben maguk is
rájöttek, hogy bíz az egészen helytelen dolog volt: szegény Kemény
Jánost itélni el számkivetésre, a ki a nélkül is rabságban ül, s nagy
nehezen rávették a heveskedő Simont, hogy dugja hüvelyébe a kardját s
aztán jobban megruminálva a dolgot, másik határozatot hoztak, melynek
értelmében Kemény János fővezérnek fenhagyatik, hogy ha hazaszabadul a
fogságból, magát a rendek előtt, ha tudja, tisztázhassa, s a veszedelmes
hadjárat okainak igazságát kimutassa.

Mikor aztán Barcsay Ákos visszatért az elsőbb határozattal, melyet ugyan
nagy koczódásba került a fejedelemmel aláiratni, akkor azt mondták neki,
hogy no csak forduljon meg a sarkán, s vigye fel a fejedelemhez ezt a
második határozatot.

– Eb megy vissza harmadszor is a fejedelemhez! Így is majd kidobott ő
nagysága, doctor Reineckius pedig mindenkit a kristélylyal fenyeget, a
ki még egyszer a magas beteget háborgatni próbálja.

– No hát, felviszem én! ajánlkozék Kemény Simon, s a rendek ráhagyták,
elfeledkezve róla, hogy ő a háznagy, a kinek a rend fentartása kívül is,
belül is hivatalos kötelessége.

Ezzel hát a mai ülésnek a feladata szerencsésen be lett volna végezve; a
rendek kérdeztek sokat: megtudtak semmit; határoztak sokat: végeztek
semmit.

S azzal, quasi re optime gesta, kezdtek felczihelődni s abba a
gyülésbontó csendes zsibongásba általmenni, a mikor senki se bánja, hogy
vajjon miért tátog az elnök.

Az asszonynépben forrt a méreg.

– No, feleim! mondá Ilka asszony, most kezdődik már az országgyülés!

Azzal felugorván a padra, hatalmas harangcsengésű szóval elkiáltá magát:

– Úr uraim! Országos rendek és méltóságok! Ne higyjétek aztat, hogy mi
azért jöttünk volna ide, hogy a ti koczódásaitokban gyönyörködjünk,
hanem hogy tőletek a mi rabságban sinylődő férjeink kiszabadítását
követeljük!

Ez a felszólalás nagy indignatiót keltett a rendek közt.

– Csitt! asszonyok! Ez itt országháza! kiálta recsegő hangon az egyik
tanácsúr nagy dölyfösen.

De visszavágott ám neki Ilka hatalmasan.

– Bizony majd azt hinné az ember, hogy még most is pajta, arról a sok
üres szalmáról, a mit úr uraimék itt csépeltek.

Ez már szörnyűség volt. «A tyúk kukorékol!» «Mulier taceat in ecclesia!»

– Fájdalom, hogy nem vagyok «mulier», nem asszony, hanem «vidua»,
özvegyasszony, s az özvegyasszonynak hazánk törvényei szót és szavazatot
adnak mindenha! Tudjátok, a kik a törvényt ismeritek.

Ez egy kis gyenge lefőzés volt. A szép szónoknőnek akadtak rögtön
párthivei, a kik azt kiálták: «halljuk! halljuk!» Mások ellenben,
különösen az éltesebb urak, annál határozottabban hangoztatták: «Vége
van! Levata est sessio! Ebédre harangoznak.»

S valóban a szamosujvári toronyban épen akkor kezdtek el delet
harangozni.

– Uraim! kiálta Damokosné; kilenczvenezer jó magyar hazafinak nem
harangoznak ebédre, a kik tatár rabságban moslékkal és döghulladékkal
tengetik életöket! Van-e lelkük kegyelmeteknek, hogy nyugodtan asztalhoz
üljenek, hogy fejüket álomra hajtsák, a míg kilenczvenezernyi vérük,
atyafiuk jajkiáltásai verdesik az eget; s idehaza egy egész árván maradt
nemzet sír miattuk? De fogadom lelkemre, hogy ma kegyelmeteknek sem
harangoztak ebédre, de még vacsorára sem fognak harangozni! Mert mi
innen kegyelmeteket ki nem bocsátjuk addig, a míg a raburaink kiváltását
el nem végzik.

«Nem bocsátjuk! Bizony nem bocsátjuk!» kiáltozák egy szívvel és szájjal
mind a száz asszonyok, a kik odabenn voltak.

Kiabált az elnök, harsogtak az urak, de mind elnyomta azt az asszonyok
sivalkodása. A kivüllevő asszonynép pedig, a ki a bejáratnál leste a
kimenetelt, azt vélve, hogy a küldötteiket odabenn öldöklik,
nekivételkedtek annak a gyarló deszkapalánknak, a mi a pajta nyilását
elzárta, egyet recscsent, kettőt roppant, azzal bedőlt s a résen
keresztül tódult be az egész asszonysereg, a mennyi csak befért.

A tulsó oldalán a pajtának épen olyan deszkafal volt felállítva, nagy
hiba lett volna, ha másik pillanatban az ott összegyülekezett fehérnépek
azt is be nem döntötték volna; most aztán mind a két oldalon megtelt az
országház asszonynyal, a mennyi csak befért, a kívülről tódulók a száz
küldöttet előre tolták, úgy, hogy azok a zöld asztalhoz, az urak hátára
lettek szorítva, egy-kettő a tolongásból felugrott a lóczákra, utoljára
Damokosné valami tizedmagával épen a zöldasztalra jutott fel.

Lárma pedig vala olyan nagy, hogy senki a maga szavát nem hallhatá.

Soha még országgyülést, mióta a világ áll, ilyen «pressió» alatt nem
tartottak.

Szép lett volna feloszlatni a gyülést, csak lehetett volna. De minden
követnek a vállára három asszony támaszkodott, ott kellett ülve maradni.

Végre aztán Damokosné addig integetett a becsődült asszonynépnek,
mutogatva, hogy ő akar beszélni, a míg lassanként elcsendesülének.

Az első csendességet azonban egy tanácsos úr arra használá fel, hogy
mérgesen protestáljon az erőszak ellen.

– Micsoda violenczia ez?

– Igenis, violenczia, felelt rá Ilka asszony. De igazat ad nekünk hozzá
ez a gyászfátyol a fejünkön, a mit mi sem jókedvünkből viselünk. De bár
akkor tették volna az asszonyok ezt a violencziát, a mikor kegyelmetek
elhatározták, hogy háborút kezdjenek! Bár akkor jöttünk volna ide
protestálni az oktalan vérontás, pusztulás, veszedelem ellen, a mi
országunkat érte. Egész sor tanácsos úr esküdött itt rendre egymás után,
hogy ő semmit sem tanácsolt a fejedelemnek, mikor az a hadjárathoz
készült; küldték volna hát maguk helyett az asszonyaikat, azok majd
tudtak volna a fejedelemnek jó tanácsot adni.

Ez az igazmondás egy kis derültséget keltett az urak között is. «Füge
egy menyecske!» dörmögék a szakállukba.

Azután nagy csendesség között folytatá Damokosné:

– De nem jöttünk mi ide zűrzavart, háborúságot csinálni. Nem hányjuk mi
szemére sem a diætának, sem az ország tanácsának, sem a fejedelemnek
azt, a mi megtörtént. Tudjuk, nekik is fáj. Hanem azért jöttünk, hogy a
megtörtént veszedelem megszüntetését követeljük. A mit az ország és a
fejedelem elrontott, tegye jóvá az ország és a fejedelem; ha elfogatta
az urainkat seregestül, váltsa ki őket seregestül.

Rédey Ferencz elnök uram csendesen válaszolt az asszonyi szónoknak.

– Hiszen épen azon tanácskozunk, jó asszony, hogy hogyan és mi módon?

– Minek ide az a nagy tanácskozás? Itt van a szultán követe, itt a tatár
khán követe: le kell a kezeikbe tenni a váltságdíjat s azonnal
hazaeresztik a fogoly seregünket. Minket se kínoznak, azokat se kínozzák
tovább.

– Igaz az, jó asszony! helyeslé az elnök. De hát a mostani inséges
időkben honnan vegyen egy akkora summát az ország, mint a mekkorát a
khán követel, jó asszony?

Damokosné megsokallta már a sok «jó asszony»-t, mert neki más titulusa
is volt.

– Hát megmondom, jó ember, hogy honnan vegye az ország azt a nagy summát
egyszerre. Meg van az, közel van, csak meg kell markolni. Ott van a
nyolczvanezer arany, a mit dicsőült nagyfejedelmünk, Bethlen Gábor
király az országnak hagyott rendkívüli szükségekre. Itt a rendkívüli
szükség; ott a nyolczvanezer arany! Tessék approbálni.

Az urak között élénk mormogás támadt. Ez az asszony a fejére talált a
szegnek. Tudták az urak maguk is, hogy megvan az a pénz. Csakhogy az a
fejedelemnő ládája fenekén van, s nem akadt férfi, a kinek elég erős
szive legyen erre ráutalni; asszonyi bátorságnak kellett feltámadni,
mely az első szót kimondja.

Az indítvány meg volt most már téve, in optima forma. Lehetett fölötte
tanácskozni, napirendre kitüzés nélkül.

Nem is lehetett ellenvetést tenni! Ez a pénz az országé. Joga van vele
rendelkezni.

Az egyik Ebéni rögtön magáévá tette az indítványt, s rövid szóváltások
után, a mik inkább csak a formaságok megtartása végett emeltettek,
kimondhatá az elnök a határozatot, miszerint a rendek a Bethlen Gábor
hagyományozta összeget a rab hadsereg kiváltására fordítják. S ezzel a
mai gyülés csakugyan nevezetes lépést tett előre.

– No már most hugomasszonyok, szálljanak le az asztalról s menjenek haza
Isten hírével! mondá az elnök.

– Dehogy megyünk! viszonzá Ilka asszony. Nincs még ezzel vége. Ha
egyszer vége lesz, majd kiáltunk mi az országgyülésnek olyan nagy
vivátot, hogy reng bele a ház, s elmegyünk a magunk jószántából, minden
küldés nélkül.

– Hát mi kivánságuk van még?

– Mi bizony? Hát talán azt gondolják a tekintetes rendek, hogy azért,
mert «hosszú haj, rövid ész», hát mi sem látunk tovább az orrunknál? A
mióta szegény rab uraink távol földön vannak, megtanultuk már a
messzelátást. Hiszen vak tyúk volna, a ki azt nem látná, hogy a mint
Lorántfy Zsuzsánna nagyasszonyom megtudja azt, hogy a rendek
elhatározták a Bethlen Gábor kincsének a kiadatását, menten összepakol
Fogaras várában, s úgy el-kikocsikázik széles Magyarországba a pénzzel
együtt, hogy üthetjük bottal a nyomát. Meg kell azt a pénzt fogni, még
pedig vasmarokkal.

– Ebben az asszonyban tizenhárom prókátor veszett el, dörmögé az elnök a
protonotáriushoz.

– Meg hét diplomata, toldá hozzá a főjegyző.

– Hát hogyan gondolja kegyelmed, úrasszonyom?

– Megmondom én azt is. Határozzák el a rendek egyúttal az özvegy
fejedelemasszony elfogatását is.

De már erre nagy zúgás támadt az urak között. Ez még sem megy. Ez már
lehetetlen! Elkezdtek egymás közt diákul társalogni, hogy a nők ne
értsék.

«Hoc non pergit! Hoc non pergit!» Ez hangzott legsűrűbben.

– Már pedig, akár «pergit», akár nem «pergit», de uraságtok innen addig
el nem «pergit», a míg ezt el nem határozza a diæta: ha holnapután
ilyenkorig együtt maradunk is.

Ez veszedelmes fenyegetés volt. Ez az asszonyhad bizony még kiéhezteti a
diætát.

Keresztül rontani rajtuk pedig tiszta lehetetlenség. Csak a kik odabenn
vannak is, rengeteg sokaság, de hát még a ki a pajtán kívül áll! Az
egész áttörhetetlen hadsereg!

Nem volt itten más szabadulás, mint hogy tegye ismét Ebéni uram magáévá
a veszedelmes indítványt, s abba azután a rendek általános köhögéssel és
torokköszörüléssel consentiáljanak. Protonotárius uram soha olyan
nehezen nem concipiált, mint ezúttal, a tollának a szárát félig megette,
a míg elkészült vele; akkor meg a rendek nem voltak megelégedve a
conceptusával; de bíz ő maga sem: mindenki hozzászólt, az egyik ezt a
szót, a másik amazt kivánta beleszurni, ide egy clausulát, oda egy
mentális reservátát, a «pedig» helyett «mindazonáltal»-t. Utoljára addig
furtak-faragtak, gyalultak rajta, míg csakugyan nyélbe ütötték a
határozatot, mely szerint az özvegy fejedelemasszony, rangjához illő
tisztességgel, nyájas és kellemes módon elfogattassék, s a pénzzel
együtt az egybegyült Rendek elé hozassék és kérdőre vonassék.

Porzót és pecsétet rá!

De már most ki vigye fel ezt a fejedelemhez aláirás végett?

Minden ember eltagadta az ahhoz való tehetségét. Utoljára is Barcsay
Ákost megfogták, felemelték, a határozatot a kebelébe dugták: el kellett
neki fogadni, vagy tetszett, vagy sem, a küldetést.

De hogy kell innen kimenni?

Az asszonysereg tömegén keresztül még egy egér sem futhatna ki. Azok
pedig nem nyitnak utat.

Nem volt más mód, mint hogy Barcsayt felemelték a fejük fölé, s aztán
mint egy hanyattúszó embert a hullámok tetején, úgy adták kézről-kézre a
tenyereiken, a míg valahol odakünn a száraz földre jutott.

A fejedelemnek pedig doktor Reineckius ez alatt akkora dosis
ipecacuanhát adott be, hogy a felől annak még ettől az egész planétától
is elment a kedve. Azt mondá, hogy úgy küldjenek hozzá a rendek még ma
egy határozatot, hogy azt ő vagy olvasatlanul aláirja, vagy valami mást
cselekszik vele.

Az elsőbbet tette meg.

Bele sem tekintett az eléje tett határozatba, csak aláöklözte a nevét.

Barcsay Ákos mégis czélszerűnek látta, per apices elmondani a
fejedelemnek a határozat meritumait. A Bethlen Gábor-féle nyolczvanezer
aranyról van szó.

– Bánja a szösz!

«Aztán meg a rendek, nagyobb megnyugvás okáért, az özvegy
fejedelemasszony személyét biztos helyre akarják tenni.»

Azt sem bánta a fejedelem. Miatta most elfoghatják, le is nyakazhatják,
el is temethetik az egész világot.

Barcsay Ákos a legjobb sikerrel térhetett vissza az országházba, a hol
most már út volt a számára nyitva az eleven fal között, a mely azonban
ismét összezáródott utána, mint a Soncha barlangjának a sziklái a
szerencsétlen kincskereső után.

Abból a jelenségből, hogy az aláirás ilyen hamar megtőrtént, mind a
rendek, mind az asszonynépek azt az örvendetes következtetést vonták le,
hogy tehát a fejedelem is nagyon helyesli ezt az egész modus
procedendit.

Csak Ilka asszonynak maradt meg a gyanuja a lelke fenekén. Nem hisz ő
már senkinek, a mióta az Apor Istvánban olyan keservesen megcsalódott. A
milyen szelid, nyugalmas, minden embert jónak hivő teremtés volt addig
az ideig, abban a pillanatban, a mikor megtudta, hogy a szerelmetes
férjét a legjobb barátja árulta el, és még milyen praktikával: egyet
fordult az egész lelke. A gyöngeség erővé vált benne, a szelidség
haraggá, a hitből kételkedés lett, a félelemből vakmerőség. Eddig soha
még a visszafeleselő cselédjével sem mert szembeszállni; most szarvakat
emelt, hogy a fejedelmet megöklelje vele.

– Ne örüljetek még asszonyok! Kiálta onnan az asztal tetejéről a
zsibongó hadnak. Még hátra van az ebek harminczadja, nem estünk át
rajta. Most siessünk ki innen sebtén, vissza a szekereinkhez; de
körülfogva tartsuk a várat s egész éjjel őrt állassunk; nehogy a
fejedelem előre futtassa a kengyelfutóját Fogarasra, s megizenje az öreg
asszonynak, hogy mit határoztak a rendek, s aztán mire a diéta küldöttje
megérkezik, már akkor csak hült helyét találja a fejedelemnőnek, meg a
nyolczvanezer aranynak.

S ez bizonyára nagyon okos észrevétel volt; csakhogy már későn jött! A
fejedelem Barcsay Ákos eltávozta után mégis utána gondolt annak, hogy
mit határoztak a rendek? Ennek fele sem tréfa. Azonnal levelet írt az
özvegy fejedelemnőnek, tudatva vele a veszedelmet, s a kengyelfutóját
felöltöztetve parasztnak, abban a nyomban útnak indítá a levéllel; úgy,
hogy annak egy pár órai egérútja volt az országgyülés kiküldötte előtt.

Mire az asszonyi had körülfogta a várat, már akkor messzejárt a
kengyelfutó a levéllel: strázsálhattak már szegények egész éjjel imette.

De nemcsak a fejedelemnőhöz küldött izenetet Rákóczy György, hanem a
Kolozsváron levő hadai parancsnokához, valamint a gyulafehérvári
kapitányhoz, hogy a titokban összegyűjtött hadaikkal vonuljanak fel
Szamosujvárra.

(Mert az alatt, a míg a rendek azon tanakodtak, hogyan fizessék ki a
nyakukon ülő törököt, tatárt aranynyal és szép szóval, az alatt Rákóczy
György abban fáradozott, hogy mint fizesse ki ezt a kegyetlen zsarnokát
az országnak – vassal. Uj hadakat gyűjtött, arra kellett neki minden
pénz. Nem fösvénységből tagadta ő meg a foglyok kiváltását; hanem a
fegyverén esett kudarczért készült boszút állni. De ezt nem mondhatta
meg a rendeknek, mert azok bizonyára ellene lettek volna. Azokat nagyon
bölcsekké tette az országos pusztulás.)

Egész csendességben megteltek a Szamosujvárral szomszédos falvak:
Mikola, Boncs, Hesdát, Ördöngős-Füzes a fejedelem gyalog és lovas
katonáival, benn a várban is volt némi helyőrsége, azok között hatszázra
menő szász, Gaudé András kapitánynyal, meg a szász egyetem
darabantjaival; Deés felől pedig közeledőben volt Bethlen János és
Barcsay András a Krakkóban hátrahagyott helyőrséggel, a kiket Rákóczy
sógora: Lubomirszky marschall «pacificando» szabadon bocsátott. Ugy,
hogy Szamosujvárt egy valóságos érczgyűrű fogta körül a Rákóczyhoz hűnek
maradt fegyveres csapatokból addig a keserves szempillantásig, a midőn
az országgyülés kiküldötte visszakerül azzal a leverő hirrel, hogy mire
ő Fogarasra egész parádéval beczafatolt, akkorra már az öreg fejedelemnő
hopp hirével hegyen-völgyön túl járt; azóta odakinn van Magyarországon,
sárospataki várában. És így a nyolczvanezer aranyat bizony elvitte a
«patak.»

A diéta erre az értesülésre fülét fejét elereszté s nem tudta, hogy most
már szégyenkendjék-e, vagy ungorkodjék.

Annál hangosabban tört ki a zendülés az asszonynép közt. Fennhangon
szidták, mocskolták a fejedelmet, a vár ablakai alá gyülekezve, s ne
mutatta légyen egy fejedelmi darabont magát a vár kapuin kivül, mert
annak bizony kikefélték a mundérját kefe nélkül.

Damokos Tamásné erre a rossz hirre kétségbeesetten rohant be
Szamosujvárra s berontott egyenesen a szultán tihájához, Akmet béghez.

A lábaihoz veté magát, a kezeit csókolta.

– Oh uram: kegyelmes uram! Légy hozzám irgalommal. Én vagyok a
szerencsétlen Damokos Tamásnak a hitvese, özvegy asszony, a kinek az ura
még él.

– Ahá! Te vagy az a kaczki menyecske, a ki Apor István uramhoz levelet
irtál, hogy csak hagyja az uradat ott veszni a tatár rabságban.

– Csak finta volt tőlem az a levél: a szorultság diktálta.

– Tudom, tudom, jó asszony. Elpanaszolta azt már nekem azóta Apor István
uram maga. Értem már a dolgot. Nekem volt szánva a finta, s rá is mentem
a lépre. Elfogadtam a váltságdijat. No hát mi lett a váltságdijból?

– Ő rá biztam, hogy vigye el Tatárországba s a moldvai határon
megtámadták a rablók, elvették tőle a pénzt.

– Máskor a rablókra bizd az uradnak a váltságát, azok hamarább kézhez
adják. Én pedig uradat kihozattam Perekopba. A gazdája is vele jött, s
az dühös lesz, ha a mondott időre meg nem érkezett az urad váltságdija.
Nem tudom, mit csinál vele haragjában.

– Oh hisz épen azért vagyok kétségbeesve. Se éjjel, se nappal nincs
nyugodalmam. Az ital nem megy le a torkomon, a nagy keserüségtől, s a
falatomat a porba keverem meg, mikor a jó uramra emlékezem. Azért
zudítottam fel azt a sok asszonynépet, hogy jőjjünk egyesülten fel a
diétára. Nem tudtam mást kigondolni nagy rettegésemben, mint hogy az
országtól kérjek segedelmet.

– Azt nagyon jól tetted. Egészen helyes volt. Hallottam a hirét. Derék
asszonyság vagy. Hát aztán mi történt?

– Most jött vissza a diéta követe a rettenetes hirrel, hogy a mit az
ország váltságdijnak határozott a rab magyarokért, az országnak testált
nyolczvanezer aranyat elvitte magával a vén fejedelemasszony. Előre
futtatá a fejedelem a kengyelfutóját Fogarasba hozzá, hogy elmeneküljön
a sok pénzzel, a mi uraink váltságdijával! Oh uram! könyörülj rajtunk
nyomorultakon: szegényeken.

– Oh, dehogy vagytok ti nyomorultak, dehogy vagytok ti szegények,
erdélyi asszonyok. Több kincsetek van ti nektek, mint a világ akármi
asszonyának.

– Nincs, uram, bizony nincsen, hidd el; ha minden ékességet a testünkről
kótyavetyére dobunk is, csak egy tizedrészét sem tudjuk mi előteremteni
az elcsizelt nagy pénznek.

– Nem ott van a ti kincsetek, asszony; hanem a ti pergő-forgó
nyelvetekben: soha én a szultán mamelukjait nem láttam ugy hadakozni
szablyával, dzsiriddel, mint a hogy a magyar menyecskék tudnak hadakozni
az ő szájuk éles fegyverével. Ebben vagyon a ti hatalmatok.
Gyakoroljátok, a hogy elkezdtétek. Rontsatok rajta azokra a kakasokra, a
kik tojásokon ülnek, a mikből tettek helyett szavak kelnek ki. Ha ők
kotkodácsolnak, ti kukorítsatok! Mert bizony mondom néktek, hogy ha
annyi pénzt összehordtok is, hogy Szamost lehet vele rekeszteni, azért a
ti rab uraitokat a szultán ki nem adja; hanem ha az ő parancsolatjának
engedelmeskedtek; ha ezt a lázadó fejedelmet leteszítek, elkergetítek;
választatok helyébe magatok közül egy emberséges embert, akinek a
szultán fejedelemsüveget, zászlót, athnamét küldhet: akkor mind
valamennyi rabmagyart, urat és szegényt szabadon bocsát és haza ereszt a
felséges szultán ingyen váltság nélkül. Ha pedig ezt nem teszitek; ha
ezt a hitszegő, lázadó, kevély-kutya fejedelmeteket el nem kergetitek,
hanem hozzá ragaszkodtok, bizony fogadom, hogy a tatár khán mind
valamennyi fogoly magyaroknak orrát, fülét levagdaltatja.

Ilka asszony nem várt többet. Rohant ki a bég szállásáról az utczára s
elmondá lihegő szóval az ott kinn várakozó asszonyi sokaságnak, hogy
micsoda szörnyű vigasztalást hallott tőle. Orrát, fülét levagdalják a
raboknak.

De inkább mind a négy lába eltörjön a fejedelmi széknek.

Ezt nem veszik az asszonyok olyan könnyen.

Mentek nagy zsivajjal vissza a várhoz, az országgyüléshez.

A pajtának a két nyitott oldalát ezuttal már vastag gerendákkal
rekesztették el a rendek, okulva a minapi tapasztalaton, nehogy még
egyszer rájuk döntsék a falat az asszonyok: most már csak egy kis ajtón
lehetett belépni a gyűlésterembe s azt fegyveres darabontok őrizték. De
többet ért minden erősködésnél a két Kemény fiaknak a bölcsessége, a kik
eléje jöttek az asszonyi küldöttségnek, a mely nőttön növekedett az
országházig érve. Valamennyinek az arcza piros volt már a haragtól s a
kontya félrecsapva. Ilka asszonynak a szemei ugy szikráztak, mint egy
furiáé. Arra a kérdésére Kemény Simonnak, hogy mi a kivánságuk megint?
csak annyit mondtak: (egyszerre huszan) hogy rá akarjuk gyujtani az
országházat a rendekre.

– No no, asszonyaim! Hátha megalkudnánk?

– De üszköt vetünk ugyan ennek a bódénak, ha csak…

– Ha csak?

– Ha csak rögtön le nem teszi a diéta ezt a hitszegő fejedelmet.

– Mindjárt megértjük egymást. Hiszen a rendek is épen abban fáradnak
odabenn. Higyjék el kegyelmetek, drága asszonyságok, hogy odabenn még
forróbb az «aër», mint idekinn. A szultán és a tatár khán kegyetlenül
befütöttek a rendeknek. Épen most olvassa fel a protonotárius a
leveleiket, a mikben kegyetlen fenyetőzéssel követelik Rákóczy György
letevését, számüzetését.

– Hát min tanakodnak még akkor a bölcsek? heveskedék Ilka asszony. Miben
válogatnak? Ha két félelem között van a választásuk, csak megmondja
nekik talán a fogvaczogásuk, hogy melyik a nagyobb? A melyiktől jobban
rázza az embert a hideg! A fejedelemtől kell-e jobban félni, vagy a
szultántól. Gonosz betegség ez! Az urakat még csak a hideg rázza, de már
mink a forró lázban vagyunk, s nem ismerünk se Istent, se urat! Ha el
nem kergeti az országgyülés a fejedelmet, felgyujtjuk az országházat.

– De azt bizony ne tegyék kegyelmetek, a míg Bánffy Dénes uram vissza
nem jön a várból.

– Hát mi dolga ott?

– Ime felvivé a rendek kérelmét a fejedelemhez, hogy mondjon le önként a
fejedelemségről.

– Mit, kérelem neki? Mit instáncziáznak? Ha a számadó juhászom
széthagyja zavarni a farkasoktól a juhnyájamat, maga hibájábul: nem
kérem, hogy menjen; kergetem botszóval. Hát annyi ezernyi magyar vitéz
nem több a birkánál?

– De a fejedelem is több ám a számadó juhásznál.

– No és ha azt mondja válaszul a rendeknek, hogy «eb ura a fakó!» akkor
mit lesznek teendők?

– Hát az majd megválik. De most nagyon kérem kegyelmeteket, hogy a saját
magunk, és az egész ország érdekében ne rontsanak be az országgyülésbe;
hanem maradjanak kivül. Nehogy majd egy másik országgyülés azt
mondhassa, hogy ennek a mostaninak a határozata pressio alatt hozatott,
confusio volt benne, rend és forma ellen történt s ennélfogva
érvénytelen. Sőt tartsák kegyelmetek magukat távol és csendesen; hogy
rájuk ne foghassák a beavatkozást. Én bizony mondom kegyelmeteknek, hogy
a mai szent napon Rákóczy György elmegy a fejedelmi székről. Vagy önként
megy, vagy elmenettetik; de ezzel a mai nappal együtt ő is leáldozik.
Erre a hitemet kötöm le. S hogy szavam igaz lesz, arra zálogul odaadom
kegyelmednek Damokos Tamásné asszonyom az édes kedves kardomat az
oldalamról; tartsa azt estig magánál, kösse fel a saját derekára, s ha
hazugságban maradok, soha se adja vissza: rókafarkat viseljek az övemen
kard helyett.

Ez a tréfásan komoly beszéd úgy, a hogy lecsillapítá az asszonyokat; de
még alkalmasabb volt a felgerjedt indulatoknak más fordulatot adni az a
hir, a mit gyors futamodással hoztak a városból a hátramaradtak: «lovas
katonaság közelít nagy számmal Ördöngös-Füzes felől!»

S azzal egy időben a toronyban felállított őrök kiáltozák, hogy a
hezdáti uton nagy porfellegek mutatkoznak, a mikből számos dárdák hegyei
villognak elő.

A fejedelem katonaságot hoz az országgyülés ellen!

«No most hát felkötöm a Kemény Simon uram zálogbahagyott kardját!
Mutassuk meg asszonyok, mit tudunk?»

S ezt mondva Ilka asszony, valósággal felköté a kardot a karcsu derekára
s hamarosan parancsokat osztott, a mik nyomban végre is hajtódtak.
Egyfelől a szamosujvári utczákat, másfelől a Szamoson átvezető hidat úgy
eltorlaszolták egymásnak fordított szekerekkel, hogy azokan se gyalog,
se lovas had tréfásan át nem törhet. A Szamos hidjáról pedig felszedték
a padlókat. (Tudva levő dolog, hogy a Kolozsvárról Deésre vezető
országút olyan elmésen van fundálva, hogy az utbaeső Szamosujvárt nem
érinti, hanem a Szamos tulsó partján halad el: ide csak hidon lehet
bejönni. Armeniopolis lakosai nem szerették a keresztülutazó katonákat!)

Damokos Tamásné úgy kommandérozott, mint egy generális, s egész
strategiai éleslátással rekeszte el minden bejáratot a vár és
országgyülés épülete felé.

Igaza volt. Ha az asszonyoknak nem szabad pressiót gyakorolni az
országgyülésre, hát akkor a katonáknak se legyen szabad.

Bánffy Dénes ez alatt visszaérkezett a várból a fejedelem válaszával.
Rákóczy György nem mond le a trónról a szultán fenyegetésére, hanem
daczol vele, s kész fegyveres erővel megvédeni az országát és trónját a
török hatalom ellen.

Ez a kemény makacsság, a megtörtént nagy veszedelem után s a fenyegető
még nagyobbal szemben, végső elkeseredésbe hozta a rendeket. A mint a
visszatérő küldött kimondta, hogy Rákóczy György nem lép le, egy szívvel
és szájjal kiáltának fel valamennyien: «no hát letétetik!»

Nem fázott már senki. Náluk is bekövetkezett a láznak az a foka, a mikor
a vér a fejnek tódul.

A zaj lecsillapultával az elnök Rhédey Ferencz kimondá, nyugodt,
elhatározott magatartással, hogy az egybegyült erdélyi rendek a
törvényesen megválasztott fejedelmet ismét törvényesen leteszik
trónjáról.

Az első felindulás zaja olyan nagy volt, hogy azt meg kellett hallani a
nyitott pajtaoldalokon keresztül nemcsak a kivül álló sokaságnak, hanem
magának a fejedelemnek is odafenn a várban. Látni lehetett az alakját
többször az országgyülési pajta felé néző ablakban, a mint összefont
karokkal merően odaállt; sápadt arcza, kőmerev szemei, beharapott ajkai
elárulták, hogy miben szenved most. Gyűlölnie kell azt a népet, a melyet
kénytelen szeretni. Nem veszi észre, hogy fenyegetik ököllel az özvegy
asszonyok odalenn, nem veszi észre, hogy egy dühös mænade felmarkol egy
csomó porondot s feléje hajítja. Egy nagy szál árboczfa van az országház
elé plántálva, azon lobogtat a szél két zászlót, az egyiken Erdély
czímere, a másikon a Rákóczy családé. Ezeket a zászlókat bámulja
mereven.

Azután a harsogó lármára mély csend következik.

Mi történik odabenn? kérdezi mindenki. A szó elhal az ajkakon.

Az történik e nagy csendességben, hogy az országgyülés főjegyzője a
rendek határozatát szerkeszti irásba; a holott renddel elősoroltatnak
azok a sulyos indító okok, a mik Rákóczy Györgyöt megéretté teszik
fejedelmi süvegének elvesztésére.

A mély csendesség tart még akkor is, midőn a főjegyző felolvassa a
sulyos határozatot. Egy hang sem szól ellent. Mindenki belenyugszik,
némán, méltóságteljesen: egész érzetével a cselekedet fontosságának.

De a fejedelmi trón egy perczig sem maradhat üresen. Választani kell
mást! Ki legyen a fejedelem.

Uj rivallás támad! Ismét oly általános, mint az elébbeni; de ez már nem
a harag hangját, inkább az örömét, a lelkesedését hirdeti a levegőknek.

Mi történik ott most? Kérdezi a sokaság.

Mi történik ott most? kérdi az a márványarcz fenn a várablakban.

Az történik, hogy új fejedelmet választanak.

Ki legyen? Az a kérdés.

Barcsay Ákos felugrik a pad tetejére s elkiáltja magát: «éljen Rhédey
Ferencz, Erdély fejedelme!»

Az a nagy rivallás ezt a «vivát»-ot sokszorozza.

A derék főur váltig szabadkozik, hogy ő nem arra való; nincs neki se
kedve, se tehetsége hozzá, hogy ő öreg ember, lovon sem ülhet már,
csatákat intézni, sereget vezetni soha se volt kenyere! nem hagyják
szóhoz jutni, a karszékével együtt felemelgetik a levegőbe. Utoljára
megharagszik, nagyot sujt a buzogányával a zöld asztalra s kivívja, hogy
legalább mint elnököt hallgassák ki.

– Tekintetes rendek! Hát ne válasszunk úgy fejedelmet, a hogy a kozákok
választják a Kosevoi Attamánjukat: a kik addig czibálják a megválasztott
üstökét, s ütik agyba-főbe, a míg kötélnek áll s elfogadja a fejedelmi
süveget; hanem válaszszunk rend és törvényes szokás szerint, candidatura
s titkos szavazás mellett, megtartva, hogy a canditatióban az ország
mind a négy bevett vallása repræsentálva legyen.

Ebbe csakugyan bele kellett nyugodni. S akkor aztán megalakult a
candidáló bizottság és a scrutinium. Barcsay Ákos is belekerült a
jelöltségbe; de ő maga kért minden embert, hogy ő rá ne szavazzanak.

Ez alatt ismét csendességnek nevezhető időköz támad.

Mi történik ott benn?

Egyszer csak megjön rá a felelet. Az árboczon lengő zászlók egyike
elkezd alá szállni, és Rákóczy György onnan a várablakból láthatja, hogy
hull alá a czimeres zászlója Erdély lobogója mellől: le a porba.

Most már tudta mindenki, mi történt.

A lehulló zászlót frenetikus «vivát» ordítással üdvözlé az asszonyok
serege: ezer meg ezer kéz fordult mutató ujjával a fejedelem felé, kinek
az arcza ettől a látványtól olyan sápadt lett, mint egy sírból feltámadt
halotté.

Percz mulva eltünt az ablakból.

De kevés vártatva dobpörgés, trombítarecsegés hangzott a várudvaron. A
kapuk megnyiltak, s a fejedelmi várőrség zárt hadirendben nyomult ki a
térre, elől Gaudi szász dárdásai, utánuk a lovasság, s azoknak a
közepette a fejedelem maga lóháton, – kivont karddal.

Mit akar azzal a kivont karddal?

Szét akarja verni az országgyülést, a mely őt letette.

Nem volna nagy munka azt a csoport urat onnan a pajtából a palánkon
keresztülugratni, s a trónról elüző határozatot visszakergetni a
kalamárisba.

Hanem közbeesik négyezer kétségbeesett asszony hada. Az nem ereszti a
fegyveres hadat az országházig.

Mint egy mozdulatlan sáncz, úgy fogják körül az országházat, vállat
vállnak szorítva, s szitokkal, gúnynyal fogadják a fejedelmet, ki
lovasai élén rést keres az országházhoz.

– Minket öless előbb halomra! kiált Damokosné, odavetve magát vakmerően
a fejedelem paripája elé. Tapostass el a lovasaiddal. Ha az urainkat
elvesztetted, veszíts el bennünket is. Otthon vannak az árváink, azokat
is ölesd rakásra, hogy ne maradjon, a ki megátkozzon. Sujts ide azzal a
karddal! Ellenséget nem tudtál vele verni: verd hát a magad népét vele.
A hol fegyverre, férfira találtál, hüvelybe taszítád, elfutottál vele:
most diadalmaskodhatsz! Látod: asszonynép van itt és fegyvertelen. –
Vágjad fejedelem!

Rákóczy György a fogait csikorgatta dühében, s szeméből könyet facsart
ki a szégyen. Hüvelyébe taszítá a kardját.

Nem lehet asszonyok ellen harczolni.

– Eh mit! kiált egy daczos hang a fejedelem kiséretéből. Korbács kell
ezeknek, meg seprü, nem kard; küldje csak nagyságod a szász darabontokat
ellenük vizes kötéllel, fogadom, hogy útat nyitnak!

Ilka asszony Apor István szavát véli megismerni a goromba tanácsadóéban
s erre elfutja a méreg. Most már ő ránt kardot: ott van az oldalán a
Kemény Simon szablyája.

– No ha te mi ránk korbácscsal akarsz jönni, mi fogadunk téged
doronggal: úgy készülj. Tépjétek szét asszonyok azt a kerítést!

Az országház pajtáját a szabad tértől egy hevenyészett kerítés zárta el,
keresztberótt fenyőfadorongokból. Egy percz alatt szét lett bontva a
kerítés, s a hány dorong, annyi asszony kezében kalimpált a levegőben.

Jöjjenek hát azok a szász universitás darabontjai a korbácsaikkal!
Jertek zöld angyalok: kék angyalok lesztek!

Rövid időn úgy járt Rákóczy György, hogy az ő serege volt megtámadva a
fenyegetőző asszonynépektől.

A felrendelt hadak pedig se Szamosujvár felől, se a hesdáti útról nem
jöhettek át a szekérsánczok és a felszedett hid miatt, hogy együttes
megjelenésükkel véget vessenek ennek a kellemetlen patáliának. A vakmerő
asszonynép belekapaszkodott a lovasok zablyáiba, s elfogdosta a
lándzsások czuczáit. Ördögök voltak velük, nem féltek azok senkitől.

Ez alatt pedig odabenn a pajtában folyt csendesen a fejedelemválasztás.
A scrutinium-bizottság számlálta a szavazatokat. A túlnyomó többség
Rhédey Ferenczre adta a szavát. Barcsay Ákos kapott nyolczat, a
lutheránus jelölt egyet, az unitárius szintén egyet.

E válságos pillanatban trombitaszó hangzott Szamosujvár felől, de ebben
Rákóczy nem a maga kornétásáéra ismert, mert az török sipnak hangja
volt. Akmet bég jött lóháton teljes parádéban a város felől; mellén
kiterítve a szultán fermánja pergamenen, előtte egy lovas csausz, a
lófarkas boncsokkal, meg egy piros ruhás, rézsisakos szarácsi a török
sippal. Oda igyekezett a válság színhelyére. Csak harmad magával jött,
de azzal a magabiztával, hogy előtte fegyveres és fegyvertelen népek
bizony utat nyitnak; mert ő a földi fejedelmek leghatalmasabbikának
személyét képviseli.

Nem is igen tekingetett se ide, se oda; nem nézte, ki marad el mellette
jobbról, ki balról? Asszonyok? Fegyveres vitézek? Csőcselék, szemét! mi
gondja rá? Mereven nézett maga elé, mint a hal.

A czivakodó táborok pedig engedelmesen utat nyitottak a trombitafuvó és
boncsokvivő lovasai előtt.

Mikor Akmet bég Rákóczy György elé ért, azt meglátta s ott megállítá a
lovát; de nem szemközt fordulva, hanem csak úgy oldalvást, mintha a
fejedelmet csak félvállról venné. Ott jobbról a trombitás, balról a
boncsokos egy lófejjel hátrább maradva, mellé sorakozának s erre a
trombitás három czifra rivallást bocsátott el a török sipjából. Az azt
jelenté, hogy hallgassatok!

A helyreállt csendben aztán így szólt Akmet bég:

«Becsületes magyarok, fegyveres vitézek, Messiást hivő három nemzet! Én
Akmet Ben Khalil bég, a magas Kapu tihajája, adom tudtára mindeneknek e
mai napon ezeket. Az én uram, a felséges török szultán, (kinek árnyékát
Allah terjeszsze ki a négy világ sarkáig!) parancsolja ti nektek,
alázatos jobbágyainak, hogy a kit a ti rendeitek mai napon az ő
legmagasabb parancsolatjára a fejedelmi székből letettek, a lázadó,
hitszegő és nagyravágyó Rákóczy Györgyöt se pártolni, se követni többé
ugyan ne próbáljátok, hanem a kit az erdélyi három nemzet a megrögzött
főrendek, vagy egyéb nemzetbeli urak és úrfiak közül fejedelemnek
megválaszt, hogy az ország szegény népének oltalmazására legyen: annak
bizony engedelmeskedjetek. Mert ime megparancsolá a felséges nagy úr,
(kinek nevét Allah megdicsőítse) a budai Ali basa fővezérnek, az ő
magyarországi kormányzójának, hogy azonnal minden hadaival meginduljon
Erdélyország felé és hozza el a zászlót, a fejedelmi botot és az
athnamét a megválasztott új fejedelemnek. Hasonlatosképen megparancsolá
a fölséges krimiai khánnak, a Mehemed Ghirainak, hogy a Kemény János
vezér alatt bolondul fogságra jutott szegény rabokat mind szabadon
bocsátaná s őket hazakisértetné legkisebb sarczolás nélkül. Ha pedig az
ország a maga veszedelmét kivánná s ragaszkodnék ama gonosztevőhöz, a ki
a magas Kapu méltóságos parancsolatjára mai napon a fejedelmi székből
letevődött: megparancsolta a felséges szultán (áldassék minden jó népek
által és rettegtessék minden gonoszak által az ő neve) a budai Ali basa
fővezérnek (kinek Allah méltóságát nevelje!), hogy minden zászlóival, a
mik örökké győzhetetlenek, az egész spahik és janicsárok válogatott
seregeivel, az egri és esztergomi hatalmas basákkal, számtalan ágyúkkal
Erdélybe berohanjon, a népet a lovak lábai alá gázoltassa; az országot
végtől végig elpusztítsa, a felséges tatár khán is (kinek nemzetségét
Allah szaporítsa meg), ne csak hogy szabadon ne bocsássa a rabokat, de
sőt mégegyszer annyit hurczoljon el rabszolgául Erdélyből: haneha a
magas Kapu méltóságos parancsolatja ellen ti erdélyi három nemzet
szarvakat emelnétek. Hallottátok szavaim, a mik mind igazak. Mondám a
Zilkadi havának utolsó napján, a szentséges Mohammed Musztafa
ezerhetvenedik esztendejében. Gondoljátok meg, hogy okosat tegyetek-e,
avagy bolondot.»

Erre ismét hármat fuvatott a török sippal s visszafordítá a lovát.

És Rákóczy Györgynek látnia kellett, hogy tódul az ő saját nemzetének
asszonynépe ahhoz a hitvány szolgához, a ki a szultán cselédjeinek
rangjában következik, hogy csókolják annak a kezeit, a kaftánja szélét,
még a kengyelvasát is: leterítik eléje a zekéiket, hogy azokon léphessen
végig, s áldást zengedeznek felé; míg őt szidalmakkal tetézik, átkozzák
s tele marokkal szórják felé a port.

Az a tengermélységű keserv, a mi a szivét e látványra eltölté, egyszerre
meggyógyította a testét.

Nem volt már halavány, tűzlángban égett az arcza. Szemei fehéréből
elmult a kóros sárgaság, vér futotta azokat el: minden ereiben elkezdett
a vér egészséges lüktetésbe kerülni. Nem sírt! Kevélyen felemelte a
fejét és kaczagott. S azt kiáltá a fegyvereseinek: «no hát, lássuk azt a
budai basát! A ki törököt akar ütni: jöhet velem!»

Ez a szó gyújtott.

Az impertinens hang, a dölyfös modor, a mit a török követ használt
előttük, dühvel tölté el a harczosok szivét. Annak nem fojthatták azt a
torkára, mert a követ személye szent. Az asszonyokon nem állhattak
boszut, mert az gyávaság volna; az országgyülés rendeit nem verhették
széjjel, mert az zsarnokság volna: a fejedelem megmutatta nekik, hogy
hol keressék a koszoruikat s ezzel bizonyítá be, hogy mégis csak ő az
igazi fejedelem. Ha hibái vannak is: fejedelmi hibák!

Minden csapatja egy lélekkel kiálta neki vivátot s azt mondá, vele megy
a pokol ellen is.

Rendelkezett, hogy a szekérsánczokat hányják széjjel, s a hidat állítsák
helyre.

A míg ez megtörtént, beküldé a rendekhez Mikes Mihály kanczellárját
azzal az izenettel, hogy csak határozzanak tetszésük szerint, nem
akadályozza őket semmiben, válaszszanak, ha tetszik, új fejedelmet: ő
most a rendeknek békét hagy és másfelé fordítja haragját.

A szekérsánczot maguk az asszonyok önként elbontották, a mint azt
megtudták, hogy Rákóczy György seregével együtt el akar vonulni.

Mikor a hid helyre volt állítva s Rákóczy György a lovasai élén
átlovagolt rajta, visszatekintett az elhagyott vár felé. Akkor húzták
fel az új fejedelmi zászlót az országház előtti árboczfa hegyére.

Rákóczy György ráismert a czímerre; a kétfarkú oroszlán, koronával a
homlokán, karddal a markában: ez a Rhédeyek czímere.

A jó Rhédey Ferencznek a fia, János, épen hadsegéde volt Rákóczy
Györgynek, a testőr dragonyosok hadnagya.

– Ej ha, édes öcsém, mondá Rákóczy a mellette lovagló Rhédey Jánosnak.
Úgy látom arról a zászlóról, hogy a rendek a te édes apádat választották
meg helyembe fejedelemnek. – No ezt nem nagy fáradságomba fog kerülni
onnan elkergetnem, ha visszatérek.

– Magam is azt hiszem, felelé Rhédey János; s aztán a vitéz urak közt
nagyon derült hangulat támadt erre a hirre. Jobb tréfát nem lehetett
volna kigondolni, mint azt, hogy a derék, jámbor, senkinek soha nem
vétett Rhédey Ferenczet válaszsza meg Erdély fejedelmének.

Erről többet nem is beszéltek. Passiójáték, semmi más ez. Hadd
játszszák, a kiket mulattat.

Rákóczy György összeszedte a hadait, megnyitotta pénzes ládáját. Rabokat
kiváltani nem volt pénze, uj zsoldosokat fogadni volt. Haller Gáborra,
Bethlen Jánosra bízta az alvezéri tisztséget.

Azzal egyenesen Jenő felé indult, a hol Ujlaky László várkapitány,
Diószegi Kristóf lovassági hadnagy, az ő hivei védték a várat a nagy
sereggel megérkezett budai fővezér Ali basa ellen.

A Maros partján megütközött Rákóczy György a török fővezérrel, s úgy
pozdorjává törte az egész ozman sereget, a hogy már régóta nem volt a
félhold fegyvere megalázva a magyar földön: felét a török hadnak
belekergette a Marosba, a ki oda nem fult, csak az menekült meg. A
fővezér maga egy csónakon szabadult ki a mészárlásból; de elesett az
egri basa, meg az esztergomi bég; s ott veszett a török ármádia minden
zászlója, lófarka, ágyuja, podgyásza.

Olyan volt ez, mint mikor a feldühített oroszlán kiszabadul a
ketreczéből s a gyilkos boszantói közé veti magát.

Agya-feje törötten került haza az a sereg, a melynek Erdélyt a lovak
patkói alá kellett volna gázolnia.

– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –

Hanem hát mindez nem sokat használ a szegény Damokos Tamásnak! Meg az ő
rabtársainak.




A SZERELEM BOSZUJA.

Buzdurgán murza ez alatt hiába leste-várta Perekopban, hogy mikor
érkezik meg a Damokos Tamás váltságdija?

A szultán tihajájának a leveléből világosan megértette, hogy azonnal
hozza ki az uri foglyot «Órkapu»-ba; a hogy a tatárok hívják Perekopot,
(Arany kapu) mert a váltságdijjal jönnek már Erdélyből. Ő tehát egész
kényelemmel oda utazott. A kedvencz kadináját is magával vitte, s
asszonynyal utazván, elég lassan haladhatott. De meg az emberség is azt
kivánta, hogy a foglyot nagyon meg ne hajtsa; mert annak nem könnyű
lánczczal a lábán gyalogolni: azt pedig, hogy egy foglyot szekéren
szállítsanak, no ily bolondot még nem hallott senki. Hanem az meg volt
engedve a rabnak, hogy annak a szekérnek a saraglyájába kapaszkodjék, a
melyen Kalme utazott. Így aztán lopva juttatott neki Kalme egy-egy
falatot a szultánkenyérből Buzdurgan uram minden szemfüleskedése mellett
is.

A murza nem is hitt egyebet, mint hogy a mikorra ő megérkezik a
záptenger szorosához, már akkor ott vár a Damokosné küldöttje a pénzzel.
Nagyon megorrolt, mikor nem talált ott senkit! Még neki kell ott várni a
kutyafülű gyaurra!

Perekopot pedig nem azért hiják Aran kapunak, mintha volna rajta valami
aranyos. Czudar, piszkos, ronda fészek az egész: jobb felül a holt
tenger mellette, bal felül a záptenger. Az egyiknek a partján tengeri
sót párolnak, a másikból tőzeget vágnak. Béka, sáska, ójtott szunyog,
repülő poloska annyi van, a mennyi csak kell. A levegő dögleletes, a víz
émelyítő, a nap sem süt istenesen, mindig köd ül előtte.

Az egyedüli úrnak való lakás a vár; abban van elég üres szoba.

Buzdurgán murza oda kvártélyozta be magát, a mi már csak azért is
szükséges volt, mert itt az ajtókat be lehet zárni lakattal. Egy
szobából csinált háremet, abba bezárta Kalmét, a másikból tömlöczöt,
abba elcsukta Damokos Tamást. – A kulcsokat aztán az övébe dugta, s
unalmában elment a kávéházba csibukozni, meg a tengerparton a sóaszaló
medenczéket végiglépni, aztán meg a moschéeba a keringelő dervisekben
gyönyörködni. Negyedik mulatságot, akárhogy kereste, nem tudott
kitalálni.

Mikor már nagyon sok nap elmult, azt mondá egyszer Damokos Tamásnak a
murza, mikor felnyitá a zárkáját, hogy a mindennapi piláfot beadja neki
egy fatálon.

– Hallod-e te Tamás a Damokosok között; azt gondolod-e te, hogy én nekem
valami nagy gyönyörüség itten mindennap elnéznem, hogy hány csetver sót
sepernek össze a záptenger partján? hogy hány legyet kapnak el a kutyák,
a kik a kávéház elejét körülülik? meg hogy hányat fordulnak egy óra
alatt a keringelő dervisek?

– Magamnak sincs jobb mulatságom: felelt rá Tamás.

– Neked! Dagadj meg! Te rab vagy, abban kell megnyugodnod, a miben meg
vagy. De nekem senki sem parancsolja, hogy én itt a számbarepkedő
szunyogokat köpködjem, s a büdös víztől az orromat fintorgassam, mikor
így is elég pisze. Az a te váltságdijad csak nem jön.

– Magam is eleget aggódom miatta, hogy miért nem jön.

– Én azt mondom, azért nem jön, mert nem küldik.

– A felől bizonyos lehetsz uram, hogy a feleségem azonnal elküldte a
pénzt, a mint megtudta, hogy te elfogadod.

– Én pedig azt mondom neked, hogy a te feleséged egy nagy… (Itt egy
olyan szót használt a murza, a mit nem szokás papirosra leírni.)

Erre Damokos Tamás úgy teremtette neki a fejéhez az egész tálat
piláfostul együtt, hogy a murzának a szeme, szája tele lett faggyus
riskásával.

– Ne volna csak kétezer aranyam a bőrödben, hogy összetörnélek most!
Agyarkodék a murza, letörölgetve pofájáról az ételmaradványokat. –
Veszett bolond! Most már az a büntetésed, hogy nem kapsz más ételt.
Feleheted a földről, a mit hozzám vágtál! – Hanem aztán, ha itt találsz
veszni a nyakamon: akkor lesz még majd neked drága ez a pilaf!

Ezzel a fenyegetéssel kiment a zárkából a murza s rálakatolta az ajtót
Tamásra. Azután átment a háremébe, felhordatta a maga lakomáját, s annak
az elköltése közben elpanaszlá Kalménak, hogy hogyan járt Tamással.

Kalme nevetett rajta.

– De hát minek is mondtad neki azt, hogy a felesége «az?»

– Hát mert az!

– Mért gondolod?

– Nem gondolom, hanem tudom. Megirta nekem a levelében Akmet bég, hogy
ugyan siessek elfogadni a kinált kétezer aranyat, mert a menyecske
félrecsapó. Olvasta neki egy levelét, a mit egy másik gyaur béghez írt
az asszony. Nem bánná az, ha itt veszne az ura, hogy másikat kapjon
helyébe.

S nagyobb igazság kedvért elő is vette Buzdurgán murza azt a levelet, a
mit Akmet bégtől kapott, s megmutatá azt Kalménak; Akmet bég
szórul-szóra közölte abban annak a levélnek a tartalmát, a mit Ilka
asszony Boldizsár tanácsára fintából Apor Istvánhoz irt.

– Meglátod, hogy itt hagyja az átkozott a nyakamon veszni az urát.

Kalme lecsillapította a murza haragját. Volt neki ahhoz való szere. Jó
adag mákonyt tömött a pipájába: mire azt kiszítta a murza, úgy aludt
tőle, mint a só.

Akkor aztán Kalme kivette az ővéből a zárka kulcsait, összegyüjté a
lakoma maradékát, a miket ő a saját szájától megvont, s a hogy azt
rendesen tenni szokta, mikor a murza mély álomba dölt ebéd után,
felnyitá a Tamás börtönét s átvitte hozzá a körömfaladékot.

Tamás tudta azt, hogy ilyenkor a murza alszik, s dongó legyen a talpán,
a kinek a csípésére csak annyit is szuszszant, hogy «hess légy!»
Ilyenkor történhetik felőle akármi.

– Elébb egyél, lakjál jól. Aztán majd zsémbelek veled. Mondá Kalme, oda
kuporodva Tamás mellé a szalmára.

Mikor aztán Tamás mindent elfogyasztott hűségesen, akkor rákezdte Kalme
a zsémbelést.

– Micsoda bolondot cselekedtél a murzával?

– Fejéhez vágtam az ételes tálat.

– Miért tetted?

– Azért, mert rossznak mondta a feleségemet.

– S azért úgy fel kellett gerjedned?

– Mikor azt bántják, a kit szeretek.

– Hát te azért, a kit szeretsz, minden vakmerőségre képes vagy?

– Még a halálra is.

– Még a halálra is? Akkor hát egy másik életre is?

– A másvilágon bizonynyal.

– Nem a másvilágon, hanem ezen a világon.

– De már ezt nem értem.

– Hát megmagyarázom. – Nézz a szemembe. S ha valamit a szám rosszul
mond, olvasd ki a szememből jobban. Engem is sokszor háborít az álom,
hogy miért nem született számomra olyan férfi, a ki mikor szeret, a
haláltól sem retteg? Egyet találtam s az is a másé. S ennek olyan bolond
vallása van, a mi tiltja, hogy egy szív két szivet zárjon be. Annak csak
egy nőt szabad szeretni.

Damokos Tamás elértette biz ezt a vallomást, s lesütötte szemeit
szégyenletében. Az oroszlán nem olyan rettenetes állat, mint egy idegen
asszony, a ki szerelmet vall egy feleséges embernek.

Nem tudott rá felelni semmit. Eszébe jutott József története
Potifárnéval. S neki még csak köpönyege sincs, amit a kezében felejtsen.

Pedig biz azt sejthette volna előre is, hogy a sok nyájasságnak,
barátságnak ez lesz a vége.

– Szebb a feleséged, mint én? Kérdezé Kalme, megtaszítva kezével az
elmélázót.

– Nem tudom. A feleségemet nem láttam.

(Már tudniillik «úgy», mint a kadinát.)

– De engemet láttál. Tudhatod, hogy semmi hibám nincsen. Még a hol
tizenketten vannak is mellettem, nem én vagyok a tizenharmadik; hanem én
vagyok az első.

– Az már igaz.

– Rossznak sem igen ismerhetsz. Mindenkor csak jókat tettem veled. Sok
kínzás elmaradt rólad az én könyörgéseimre, a mi különben rád volt
mérve. Én enyhítettem a rabságodat. A falatomnak felét félreraktam, hogy
teneked juttassam.

– Elismerem. Áldjon meg érte az Isten.

– Azt is tudod, hogy nem játék, a mit teszek. Mert ha megtudná
Buzdurgán, hogy téged meglátogatlak, mozsárban töretne össze.

– Elég bolondul cselekszed.

– Nem gondolok akkor arra. Azt hiszem a mennyországban vagyok, mikor
hozzád közel vagyok; azt hiszem, hogy idvezültem, mikor a szemedbe
nézek. Meg tudnék halni azért, hogy szeress. – És te engem még sem
szeretsz.

– Mert te neked már van urad; s nekem is van feleségem.

– Az igaz, hogy Buzdurgán az én uram, mert megvett a derbendi vásáron,
mint legszebb leányt háromezer aranyon, ép úgy, mint megvette a
legnagyobb lovat ugyanakkor kétezer dénáron; de ha a Kara-Kush lovának
embernyi esze volna, mint nekem, az is azt tenné, hogy nem őtet venné
fel a hátára, hanem tégedet meg engem, s elfutna velünk a világba. Az a
te feleséged pedig ki tudja, a te asszonyod-e még?

– De én tudom.

– Ne bizonyítsd. Tudod, hogy a ti országotokban van olyan törvény, hogy
ha egy asszonynak az ura egy esztendeig egy napig a feleségéhez meg nem
tér, az asszony felszabadíttatik, s választhat más urat magának.

– Én ugyan ilyen törvényről semmit sem tudok, pedig jártam volna
Gyulafehérvárott a kollégiumba. De hogy ha mindjárt Zandirhám kőpaizsára
volna is bevésve aranyozott betűkkel egy ilyen törvény, és hogy ha azt
kemény parancsolás mellett hagynák meg az én drága Ilkámnak, hogy
kövesse és én tőlem elválasztva, magát más férfinak adja: még akkor is
kétszer Tamás vagyok benne, hogy ő engemet nyomorult rabságomban
elhagyjon, mással fölcseréljen.

– Akkor nem jól ismered az asszonyokat.

– Az igaz. Több asszonyt soha sem ismertem csak a feleségemet. Annak se
tanultam az indulatait: nem fürkésztem, nem kutattam, nem jártam utána.
Nem kerestem a bizonyságokat, nem tettem próbára a hűségét, nem őriztem
Árgus szemekkel: hanem hiszek benne, úgy mint az egy Istenben!

Kalménak a szemébe szökött a köny. Boszusan törlé le a fátyolával.

– Mit keres ez az ostoba víz a szememben? Hát te hiszesz az asszonynak?
– Vajjon hisz-e te benned is épen úgy az asszony?

– Bizonyára ő is úgy hisz.

– Nem álmodja-e meg, hogy egy más asszonynak szemei égnek az orczádon? S
ha megálmodta, nem fáj-e a szive bele?

– A ki maga is igaz, annak nincsen gyanuja.

– És azért, látod, még az is, a kiben úgy hiszesz, mint az Istenben: itt
hágy kiváltatlan, nem küldi a váltságdíjad; míg az, a kit megvetsz, föl
sem veszesz, minden nap újra kezdi szabadításod munkáját. Te nem is
álmodol arról, micsoda éles tőr függ a fejed felett asszonyi hajszálon?
Az az én hajszálam. Ennek a szörnyetegnek itt, a kinek a horkolását
hallod, a hányszor fölébred, az az első szava: elhozták-e már a
váltságdíjat azért a lánczos kutyáért? S mikor megtudja, hogy még nincs
itten, dúl-fúl, átkozódik. Mennyi hizelgésbe, mennyi szép szavamba kerül
én nekem mindannyiszor lecsillapítani a haragját! A ki próbálta már
bőszült vizilovat, dühödt elefántot megszelidíteni, csak az tudja, mi az
én munkám. Szörnyű boszut akar rajtad állni, hogy ha ki nem váltnak.
Napról-napra egymásra tetézi a félrerakott haragját, hogy egyszerre
elborítson vele. Úgy kell neki mindenféle csábítással, édesgetéssel a
kezére járnom, hogy még egy napot várjon, ne vigyen még vissza, hátha
holnap megérkeznek a küldött a pénzzel. De annál nagyobbra nő mindennap
az adósságod kínszenvedésekben, ha végre is itt találsz rajta veszni.

– Én hiszem, hogy ez a mai nap utolsó napja a várakozásnak.

– Én óhajtom, hogy az legyen. Ma még meg is sértetted a murzát. Ez nem
megy ingyenbe. Ha te őt ismernéd, lélekzetet se vennél, mikor előtte
állsz, mert a mit szájából kilehel, még az is tele van méreggel. Ez
legyen az utolsó napod az ő keze közelében. Ha holnap ki nem vált a
feleséged, akkor csak az Isten segít rajtad – vagy én.

Ezzel magára hagyta Damokos Tamást a szép kegyencznő, s ismét rázárta a
börtönajtót, és visszatért az alvó szörnyetegéhez, a kinek a
horkolásától reszketett a vár.

Másnap délig senki az ajtót sem nyitotta a fogoly úrra. Még csak neszt
sem hallott magányos zárkájában, a hová még a napvilág is gyéren hatolt
be, az ajtó fölötti szűk kerek ablakon át.

Csak arról tudta meg, hogy dél van, mikor a murza hazaérkezett a
délelőtti unalmas csavargásából, végig káromkodva a hosszú folyosón.
Mikor az ő zárkájának az ajtaja előtt elment, nagyott rugott rajta:
«Kell piláf? lánczos kutya!» Azután kinyitotta az átelleni ajtót
kulcscsal s akkor meg Kalme csengő, hizelgő hangját hallá egy pillanatra
Tamás, s aztán becsukódott az ajtó, ismét csendes lett körülötte minden.
Csak egy nyomorult légy zümmögött a szögletben, a mit megfogott a pók.

«Úgy látszik, hogy a murza ma bőjtöt akar tartatni velem;» gondolá
magában Tamás.

Hosszú idő telt bele, a míg újra hallá nyikorogni az átelleni ajtót, a
mire azonnal következett az ő börtönajtajának felnyitása: előtte állt
Kalme.

A kadinának arczán valami ördögi jókedv látszott ez alkalommal: a szemei
tüzeltek, az ajkai nevetésre voltak nyitva; hanem a mellett a szemöldei
összehuzódtak, mint két kígyó.

– Jó hírt hozasz? kérdezé Tamás lelkendezve.

– Hát mit hoznék mást?

– Megérkezett a váltságom?

– Megérkezett a szabadulásod napja. Jöjj át a murzához.

– Veled együtt?

– No hát mi az?

– Nem haragszik meg a murza, ha a felesége fátyol nélkül mutatja magát
idegen férfi előtt?

– Oh a murza soha sem haragszik, mikor alszik; szólt Kalme dévajul
nevetve. Olyankor mindent megenged.

– De ha föl talál ébredni?

– Holnap reggelig nem. Annyi hashisht tettem a kávéjába, hogy egy napig
ott marad a paradicsomban. Tánczolhatunk, dalolhatunk, miatta. Ott
lakomázhatsz a hátán.

– Ne tégy velem bolondokat.

– Csak te bizd rám magadat. Mondtam, hogy megszabadítalak. Elébb lakjál
jól. Ne félj semmitől. Magunk vagyunk. A murza szolgái mind meg vannak
nyerve. – De a tánczhoz nem kell a láncz. Elvettem a lakat kulcsát;
elébb leoldom kezedről, lábadról.

Tamás engedte a lánczait levetetni.

– No jer velem. Az asztal meg van terítve.

A tatárok nem esznek asztalról. Tudta ezt Tamás.

Hanem azért neki mégis terített asztala volt. Buzdurgán murzának a háta.
A mint az esetlen nagy kolossz ott feküdt hosszan elnyulva a földön
hasmánt, Kalme az ő széles hátára rakta fel az ételeket és csemegéket:
oda kellett Tamásnak letelepedni és a gazdája hátáról lakomázni. –
Bizony olyanformán érezte magát, mint a siralomházba kitett rab, a kinek
a nyakán van már a hóhér kötele s úgy kinálják mindenféle drága étellel
és itallal – utoljára életében.

Kalme csintalanul nevetett a vendége rettegésén.

– Ne félj tőle! Nincs ez itthon. A paradicsomban van most. Nézd, hogy
ragyog az arcza a gyönyörüségtől! Most a tubafa virágkelyheiből
szürcsöli az édes mézet ajkaival. Ott jár a kristálypalota hetvenhetedik
termében. Hetvenhét huri tánczol körülötte. Nézd, hogy mosolyog reájuk!

S mikor azt látta Kalme, hogy a vendége mégis csak nagyon feszeng s
kényelmetlenül érzi magát, felkapta a murza rhinoczerószbőr korbácsát s
nagyokat húzott vele az alvónak mezitelen talpára: a mire az összevissza
rándult.

– Légy Istennel! rebegé Tamás. Ne kisértsd az ördögöt.

– Hahaha! Kaczagott Kalme. Hiszen most a hurik csiklandozzák. No hát
csak te egyél nyugton.

S azzal békét hagyott Tamásnak is meg a murzának is, s elkezdett egy
szerelmes románczot dalolni Mirza Shaffitól, s a közben egy nagy
pávatoll-legyezővel hüsselte a vendégét, meg néha a gazdáját is, a ki
neki asztalul szolgált.

Tamás azonban mindeneknél inkább éhes volt arra a hirre: hogy
megérkezett-e hát a váltságdíja? csakugyan itt van? hogy jött meg? ki
hozta el?

– Ki végezne egyszerre két dolgot? Enyelge vele Kalme. Mikor eszel,
akkor ne beszélj. Mikor iszol, vesd félre a gondot. Majd megtudsz idején
mindent.

– Csak annyit mondj, hogy szabad leszek-e már?

– A mondás hazudhat: a cselekedet igazat mond. A számnak ne higyj, hanem
a kezemnek hihetsz.

Azzal felkapta Kalme a lánczot, a mit Tamás kezéről, lábáról levett; oda
futott vele az ablakhoz, s kihajította azt rajta.

Tamás megrettent. Az jutott eszébe, hogy az a láncz az ő személyének
kiegészítő része. Azt neki Buzdurgán murza nem azért adta, hogy az
ablakon kidobálják. Hát majd mikor visszakéri? Ijedtében maga is
odafutott az ablakhoz, a melyen Kalme kidobta a lánczot, s kidugva rajta
a fejét, utána nézett, hogy hová esett a láncz?

Az biz egy mély sánczárokba esett, a minek a feneke hat ölnyi mélyen
volt az ablak alatt; e sánczárokba nyiltak az istállók kapui, a mikben a
várőrség lovait szokták tartani. Most is ott vezetgetett egy felnyergelt
paripát egy félmeztelen rabszolga, a ki meghallva a leeső láncz
csörrenését, megállt és felemelte az arczát ahhoz az ablakhoz, a honnan
a lánczot ledobták.

De hát arcz volt-e az? Ember arcza?

Tamásnak még a lelke is fázott, mikor rátekintett. Ezen az emberi
ábrázaton úgy el volt csufitva Isten remeklése, hogy irtozat volt
ránézni. Átkozott kezek csonkították így meg.

Tamást úgy megigézte ez a rémtekíntet, hogy nem bírt tőle megválni; a
keble elszorult; szerette volna megsiratni.

A szép kadina oda hajolt föléje, az arczát az övéhez illesztve s a haját
hátra simítva szép bársony kezével.

– Látod; mondá neki. Ez egy hazádfia: székely vitéz. Ezzel is az
történt, hogy Buzdurgán murzával kihozatták Perekopba, váltságdíjt
igérve érte. Ő aztán, hogy hasztalan várt a váltságdíjra, az nem jött
meg: boszujából így elcsufittatá az arczát a rabjának, a milyennek
látod. Talán nemes úr volt; most istállót tisztít.

Tamás összeborzadt. Ilyen kegyetlenül bánni egy emberrel, csak azért
mert rab volt, s itt feledték. A köny is meggyült a szemében.

A megcsufolt ember a föld felé fordítá az arczát. Tudta, hogy irtóznak
tőle.

Kalme a kezével inte az elcsufitott arczúnak, hogy vegye fel a lánczot s
vigye onnan.

– Ez a mi hivünk; suttogá Tamásnak.

(– Miféle hivünk? kiknek «nekünk»? töprengett magában Tamás.)

A mennyire a szeme ellátott onnan az ablakból, a végtelen, vigasztalan
záptenger terült el előtte, elszórt mohotkás szigeteivel, a szikes
sivatagba beleharapdáló tömpölyeivel, vérveresre festve az alkonyégtől;
sehol egy hajó, egy mentőcsónak az egész hullámpusztaságon.

– Jer innen! mondá Kalme, elvonva őt kezével az ablaktól. Milyen fagyos
a kezed! Nézd az én arczom milyen forró. S odaszorítá Tamás kezét
lángoló arczához. Nesze igyál ebből a muskavitból: ez fölmelegít.

S valami zöld ragyogású nedvet töltött egy szűknyakú velenczei
kristályból egy talpatlan pohárkába, azt maga megizlelte először,
belemártva piros nyelve hegyét, s aztán ráerőltette Tamásra.

Ez csakugyan bűbájos ital. Egyszerre tűzzé válik az emberben s minden
érző idegébe szétfut. Még a szivet is csiklandozza.

– Jer. Ülj ide mellém!

Hova? Hát csak arra az élő kerevetre: a murza idomtalan tetemére, úgy
sem jó az egyébre. S hogy Tamásnak nem akarózott a leülés, átölelte a
nyakát, úgy rántá oda maga mellé s egy hirtelen csókot nyomott az
ajakára, a mitől szegény Tamás ugyan halálra ijedt volna, ha a muskavit
lángja nem bátorítja vala.

– Haragszol érte? suttogá Kalme. Ha nem tetszett, add vissza.

De biz azt nem adta vissza Tamás, hanem csak letörülte a nyomát a
szájáról a dolmánya ujjával.

– No hát ha nem akarod, hogy szerelemről beszéljünk, hát beszéljünk a
szabadságról, mondá Kalme.

Már erre a szóra ugyan villogtak a szemei Tamásnak.

– Akarsz-e megszabadulni?

– Éjjel-nappal azért imádkozom.

– Kihez?

– Az Istenhez.

– Hát azt gondolod, hogy az a tízezer, meg tízezer társad, a ki veled
együtt esett rabságba, nem imádkozik épen úgy a szabadságért, ugyanahhoz
az Istenhez? Azt várod, hogy a te imádságodat meghallgassa, annak a
tízezernek meg azt mondja: «nem hallok!»

– Ne tarts te nekem mustrát az Isten bölcsesége felett: azt nem bízták
halandó emberre. Én igazhivő keresztyén vagyok.

– Bánom is én, akármit hivő vagy. Nekem nem kell hinnem semmit, mert
asszony vagyok. Allahnak semmi gondja az asszonyokra. Kutya, macska,
madár, asszonyi állat, él, hal, kileheli a páráját, s aztán nem vár se
jót, se rosszat. Nekünk addig kell kivennünk az életből a magunk részét,
a míg itt ezen a földön vagyunk.

– De ne töltsük az időt az istenség és az asszonyi lélek fölötti
vitatkozással, mondá bosszusan Damokos Tamás, megbotránkozva az oktalan
asszonyi állat eszeveszett okoskodásán.

– Kénytelen vagyok ám azon kezdeni, mondá Kalme, mert hogyha Istentől,
vagy lelkes asszonytól vártad a megszabadulásodat: hát mondhatom, hogy
hiába vártad.

– Mit szólsz?

– Azt, hogy még ma sem érkezett meg a váltságdijad, a murza pedig nem
vár több napot. Ha akarna sem várhat. És ha minden hizelkedésemet
elővenném is, nem tarthatnám őt egy nappal tovább sem itten. Ma mód
nélkül agyarkodó volt, a mikor hazakerült. Mindenféle csábítással,
édesgetéssel végre kivettem belőle, hogy miért dúl-fúl? A khámtól kapott
levelet, hogy minden hadaival azonnal induljon meg hosszu hadjáratra:
holnap már meg is érkeznek az agák, a kik alatta vannak, a felültetett
lovas ortákkal s rögtön ki kell vonulniok. A murza dühös ilyenkor, mert
itthon kell hagynia a palotáját, a háremét, még engemet is, és az egész
bőrgyárát, a várvavárt erzerumi vásárt; mindent itt kell ebadóba hagyni,
s aztán az egész csapatját neki kell mindennel ellátni, a mig az
ellenséges földet el nem érik. Értheted ebből, hogy miért pusztítanak
aztán a tatárok olyan kegyetlen dühvel, a hova betörnek?

– Bizony jaj annak a népnek, sóhajta fel Tamás.

– És hát tudod, hogy kinek lesz ezuttal jaj? A te nemzetednek, a te
hazád népének. A szultán parancsolta, hogy az engedetlen országot meg
kell fenyíteni; a Ghirai Khán törjön be azonnal egész seregével s
pusztítsa végig az egész országot, a hol csak magyar lakik, a mig csak a
német császár birodalmát nem éri, addig meg ne álljon.

– Én uram s Istenem!

– Bizony méltán sóhajtasz fel. Mert mikor Buzdurgán kidühöngte magát,
akkor aztán azt mondá maga vigasztalására: «no de legalább meglátogatom
azt a Gyulafehérvárt, a hol a nagy medreszben tanítják a mčhdruli irást,
de aztán ott találjam azt a huszonnyolcz asszonyi övet, a miről ez a
lánczos kutya vette a tudományát; mert ha nem találom, bizony tőbül
kiforgatom az egész Gyulafehérvárt s megeszem a népét kanál nélkül!»

– Jézusom! Máriám!

– No, ugy-e most már Jézusról, Máriáról sóhajtozol. Hát még ha a többit
megtudod? Buzdurgán úgy törülgette e fenyegetés után a száját kétfelé,
mintha már fellakmározta volna őket. Azután nevetett, s a szemeit
forgatta fölfelé. «No de még más tréfát is teszek, csak egyszer odabenn
legyek abban az Erdélyben. Ha sajnálta Damokos Tamásné asszonyom, meg az
ő pereputyjai a nyomorult rab urokért megküldeni azt a rongyos váltságot
ide hozzám, hát majd nem restellek én elmenni érte magam ő hozzá, s majd
elhozom az asszonyt is minden ijafiával együtt ide, hogy legyenek egy
csomóban.»

– Oh mennybéli szentek! nyavalygott Tamás, a kezeit összekulcsolva s a
homlokához verve.

– De iszen híhatod azokat! Messze a mennyország! A mig azok ideérnek,
addig Buzdurgán murza be is vettette sóval a te városodnak a helyét.

– Hogy én most nem lehetek otthon! hörgé Tamás, az öklével törülve
könyező szemeit.

– Hát hiszen arról akarok neked beszélni, hogy hogyan légy otthon –
hamarább, mint Buzdurgán hadai áttörnek a határon s találj szabadulást a
magad emberei számára, a kik hozzád tartozandók. Akarod, hogy erről
beszéljek?

– Kérlek, asszonyom.

– Ne mondj asszonyodnak; mert akkor azt hiszem, hogy az vagyok. No hát
közelebb huzódol-e hozzám?

Tamásnak most már csakugyan egészen oda kellett ülnie a kadina mellé,
hogy az a fülébe suttoghasson.

– A szentek nem tudnak rajtad segíteni, azt már látod, hátha a
tündelevények tudnak? Látod én tündelevény vagyok, a ki az emberek vérét
kiszívja. Imádkozni nem tudok, hanem bűvölni tudok. A börtönöd már
felnyitottam, a lánczodat levetettem. Két szál gyertyát a kezembe
veszek, kerülök-fordulok, s innen ebből a várból is kiviszlek.

– Nem hiszek én a varázslatokban.

– Te bolond. Hisz az én varázslatom nagyon is könnyű. Látod ezt a nagy
bőrerszényt? Emeld meg, ugy-e milyen nehéz? Tele van aranynyal. A hány
marokkal kiveszek belőle, annyi zárt nyitok ki vele. Fényes nappal is
sötétséget csinálok vele; a látót vakká, a beszélőt némává bűvölöm vele.

– De hisz ez a murza pénze.

– Hát kié volna másé? Azért jó nekünk.

– De hisz ezt elvenni rablás volna.

– Hát mi az?

– Te talán nem tudod, hogy a lopás rossz cselekedet?

– Annak, a ki lop, jó.

– De tiltva van. Megbüntetik érte.

– Igen, ha megkaphatják. De ha nem foghatják meg, akkor jót tett
magával.

– Ez nem az én hitvallásom.

– De az enyém az; itt tanultam a tatároknál. A mit elrabolni sikerült,
azt elrabolni jó volt. Ökröt, lovat, szép leányt: a hol kapják. A ki
elvihette, ha utól nem érték, az övé. – Engem is úgy raboltak el az apám
kertjéből. – Hát téged, meg valamennyi társadat, a kik rabok vagytok
Tatárországban, nem úgy raboltak-e el? vagy kérdezték tőletek, hogy
akartok-e velük jönni? Kezük ügyébe estetek s elhajtottak. Épen olyan
igazsággal hajtod te el a murza aranyait ezzel az egész zacskóval, még
hirmondót sem hagysz neki itt belőle.

Tamás nagyon meg volt akadva a philosophiájával. Ez a sophisma nagyon
hasonlított az igazsághoz.

– Aztán látod, mondá Kalme, ebből még az a jó is lesz majd, hogy ez a
pénz a murzának arra való, hogy a seregeit élelmezze, a mig Moldván,
Havasalföldön keresztül mennek, a hol rabolni nem szabad, mert azok a
szultán tartományai. Már most ha ez a pénz hiányozni fog a tarsolyából,
addig meg nem mozdulhat innen a seregével, s a míg ujra összeszedi a
költséget, meglehet, hogy a szultán haragja elmulik s nem küldi a
tatárokat Erdélybe.

Ez erősen sulyt vetett a latba. Azalatt haza lehetne menni Erdélybe s
tudósítani az ország nagyjait a fenyegető nagy veszedelemről.

– Csak te bizd magadat egészen én reám, suttogá Kalme. És ne tarts
semmitől. Mihelyt besötétedik, itt van egy hosszu kötél: ezen
leereszkedünk a sánczárokba az ablakból.

– Te is? Kérdé Tamás.

– Hát mit gondolsz? Itt csak nem maradhatok, ha téged megszöktettelek. A
murza darabokra tépne.

– Ez már igaz.

– Aztán meg nálam nélkül ki sem tudnál innen jutni. Nekem kell a
kapuőröket megvesztegetnem, azután meg a vámosokat a sorompóknál, amig a
két tenger közül kijutunk. De még azontul is, te, a ki idegen vagy,
járatlan ezen a földön, azt sem tudnád, hogy merre illanj; mindenütt
veszedelembe rohannál; én pedig ismerek itt minden ösvényt, tudok a nép
nyelvén: elvezetlek pusztáról pusztára, tanyáról tanyára: míg elérjük
azokat a kék hegyeket, azokat a sötét erdőket, a hol az én népem lakik.

– Hát te engem oda akarsz vinni? Kérdé megdöbbenve Tamás.

– Oda! Oda! Az én hazám őserdejébe; ahol a fák is olyan óriások, miként
az emberek; a hol szikla, folyam, erdő tele van Istennel; maga a nap is
egy Isten; és a levegő is az; ahol minden szabad: még a szerelem is.

Kalme arczát olyan tüzláng borította erre az emlékezetre, mint mikor a
felkelő nap az Elborus jeges ormait rózsalánggal festi.

– Igen ám, jó asszony, mondá Tamás, csakhogy én nem azért akarnék innen
kiszabadulni, hogy a te hazádba menjek: hanem hogy a magam országát
lássam meg, a mi énnekem épen olyan gyönyörüséges, mint te neked
Circassia.

– De ott megint csak szolgaságba futsz.

– Már az igaz, hogy magyar létemre sok megaláztatást kell a magam
hazájában elszenvednem. De hát inkább szolgálok alázattal otthon a
hazámért, mintsem büszkén száguldozzak idegen ország szabad hegyei közt.

Kalme fejét rázta. Nem értette ő ezt.

– No, ha te neked jobban tetszik a szabadságnál a szolgaság: erről sem
beszélek többet. Hát legyen úgy. Vedd hát utadat Erdély felé s türd majd
a nyomoruságot, a mit a sors majd fejedre mér. Én azt is megosztom
veled.

– Mit akarsz te velem megosztani? Kérdé hüledezve Tamás.

– Minden nyomort, sanyaruságot, ami téged ér. Leszek futásodban vezetőd,
bajodban ápolód; cseléded, szolgálód, aki nem követel semmit, se bért,
se szerelmet, se tiszteletet, csak azt, hogy odaülhessen a lábadhoz, s
ha elrugod onnan, megint visszatérhessen oda.

Damokos Tamás szivét mégis nagyon meghatotta ez a nagy ragaszkodás. Erőt
vett rajta az érzékeny indulat.

– Látod, jó Kalme, ez lehetetlenség. Én agyonütni való gonosztevő
volnék, ha az irántad való háladatosságot csak egy nap is el tudnám
feledni. Ha te engemet még annyi jóság után meg is szabadítasz, az én
szájamban az «Ur imája» egy sorral hosszabb lesz, mint másnál, mert a te
nevedet is bele foglalom. De az, hogy velem jőjj, merő lehetetlenség. A
mi keresztyén erkölcsünk, vallásunk erősen köt és fel nem oldoz.

– Nem kivánom én, hogy te légy hozzám kötve, mondá Kalme szelid
lemondással. Követlek, mint a kutyád, s a mit eldobsz, a mi másnak nem
kell, azt veszem fel: azt is megköszönöm. Se nem követelek, se nem
panaszkodom. Féltéssel nem kinozlak, még csak egy kihulló könynyel sem
mutatom, hogy fáj-e valami. Csak dalló szavam hallod. – Óh vigy el
magaddal.

– Nem lehet! Nem lehet! Tusakodék vele Tamás. – Te nem jöhetsz velem.
Nekem asszonyom van, két gyermekem anyja, a kit én szeretek, a kivel én
megesküdtem, holtomig, holtáig: Isten szent nevére, oltár előtt, pap
előtt; a kinek nevemet adtam, a kinél zálogba van a becsületem. Én annak
az egész szivemet adtam oda; nem tehetem, hogy csak egy morzsáját is
ennek a szivemnek visszavegyem tőle, s oda vigyek hozzá egy másik
asszonyt, a kiért ő róla a napnak csak egy pillanatáig is el kell
felejtkeznem. Én őt meg nem bántom.

Kalme e szóra büszkén állt fel Tamás mellől, márványnyá halaványult
arczát magasra emelve.

– Hát te azért nem akarsz magaddal vinni, hogy a szivedet odaadtad a
feleségednek? No hát jó! Majd én elmondom te neked, hogy hová jutott az
a te drága kincsed? – Eddig csupa édes mézzel olvasztgattam ezt a te
kőszivedet. Majd most maró mérget öntök reá; meglássuk, nem olvad-e meg
benne?

Damokos Tamás azt látta ezekből a villogó szemekből, hogy minden rosszra
el kell készülnie. Ez a szép Sphinx bizony összetép, ha a találós
meséjét meg nem fejtetted.

Kalme egyet rántott a nagy alvó tetemen, hátára fordítva azt, hogy a
kaftánja belsejéből előkereshesse az odadugott iratokat. Megtalálta, a
mit keresett.

– Itt van!

A hanyatt fordult óriás ekkor aztán elkezdett rémségesen horkolni, hogy
csak úgy rengett bele a ház.

No ez épen hozzá illő zenekiséret volt ahhoz a románczhoz, a mit Kalme
előadott: még azt a gonoszságot is megtéve, hogy egyszer-egyszer
belekapott az ujjaival a mellette heverő timbora hurjaiba.

– Hát volt egyszer egy szép asszony, a kinek az urát fogságra vitték,
messze földre.

Tamás összefonta karjait: megértette a szót, most az ő feleségéről
fognak beszélni. Valami nagyon rosszat. Hazugság lesz!

– De a rab neje gazdag volt. Pénze, kincse elég sok rá, hogy az urát
kiválthassa, mihelyt a sarczoltatásáról hirt vesz. Azt elküldték, meg is
kapta; kiválthatja az urát, ha letesz érte kétezer aranyat. A szegény
rab várt sokáig: mikor jön már a váltsága? Nyár elmult, őszi levél
lehullt, téli hó elolvadt, tavaszvirág kibujt: az ő váltsága nem jött.

A timbora közbe pengett, s az alvó óriás horkolta hozzá a bombardont.

– A szép asszonynak az alatt akadt odahaza vigasztalója, gyámolítója,
védelmezője.

Tamás közbevágott.

– Tudod asszony? megkinozhatsz, meggyötörhetsz, megkötözött rab vagyok;
olybá veszem, mintha a láncz rajtam volna: de a feleségemről hiába
mondasz meséket, mert én semmit sem hiszek el belőle.

– Hát meséket mondok-e én? Hát tudok-e én neveket megálmodni? Hát
ismerem én Apor István uramat?

– Apor István! kiáltá fel Tamás. Ez a név hegyes nyil volt, át is furta
magát a szive pánczélján.

– No ugy-e hogy van ilyen nevű ember a világon? Én nem ismerem. Azt sem
tudom, mely ország szülötte. Itt van a neve ebben a levélben, a mit
Akmet bég, a szultán tihájája ir Buzdurgán murzának. Azt mondja levele
elején, hogy siessen a Damokos Tamás nevű fogoly nemes urat azonnal
kihozni Or-Kapuba, s az érte küldött két ezer arany sarczot fogadja el;
mert különben bizony rajtavész az egész fogoly és senki azt egy réz
osporáért sem váltja ki. Hozzá teszi Akmet bég: most jutott épen a
kezembe Damokos Tamásné asszonyomnak egy levele, a mit Apor István
uramhoz irt, a Rákóczy György által kinevezett tutorához, de mely levél
tévedésből az én hozzám czimzett kópertába lett pecsételve. Szép
dolgokat értek meg belőle, melyek közül a te felvilágosításodra, hogy
tudjad mit cselekedjél, csak a következőket irom ide: a megszólítás így
szól: «Kedves egyetlenegy szeretett Pistukám!»

– Nem igaz! ordítá közbe lábával dobbantva Tamás.

– Ne dobolj, kérlek! Nem elég törökmuzsikát csinálunk mink ketten a
murzával? Hallgasd tovább! szép nóta ez.

«Pimpilimpim» szólt közbe a timbora.

– «Hála az egeknek, hogy mi ismét egymásé lehetünk. Az én uramat elfogta
a tatár. De nem bánom. Soha se volt vele egy örömnapom. De éjjelem és
nappalom rosszabb a purgatoriumnál.» (Pimpilimpim!)

Damokos Tamás keserüen nevetett.

– Ah, nem igaz az! Dehogy igaz.

– Én nem az ujjamból szopom: ide van irva. Én azt sem tudom, mi az a
«purgatorium.» – Hallgasd tovább. «A fejedelem bölcsen rendelte, hogy az
uram fogsága alatt kegyelmed legyen a tutorom, s a váramban lakjék…»
(Pimpilimpim.) «De rettegek attul a gondolattul, ha netalán a Damokos
Tamás kiszabadulása a mi édes boldogságunkat megzavarná. Ha ő megtudna
valamit: engem talán meg is ölne…» (Pimpilimpim, tintirintim!
pengedezett a timbora, az óriás meg fujta a pokol harsonáját hozzá.)

Damokos Tamás az összeszorított két öklével a levegőbe csapott szét s
majd meg a saját homlokát ütötte velük. – Méreg! pokolsár! vitriol
hullott a szivére. – Minő szavak!

– Tovább, tovább. Még nincs vége. «Azért vigye kegyelmed az alkudozást
úgy a szultán tihájával a váltságdij iránt, hogy soha se legyen vége.
Mert ha egy esztendő, egy nap alatt az uram haza nem kerül, elválhatok
tőle s férjhez mehetek kegyelmedhez.» (Pimpilimpim, tintirintim.)

Damakos Tamás minden tagjában reszketve dült arczczal a falnak, s égő
homlokát a hideg kövön enyhíté. Úgy nyögött.

– Most jön a legszebbje; «mert a szivem fáj, ha ránézek azokra a gyenge
kétezer körmöczi aranyakra, a kiket a bolond fővel rabságba szaladt
vétektarisznya Damokos Tamásért kellene tatár fogára adnunk; mennyivel
jobban…»

– Elég már! Elég! ordítá Damokos Tamás, dühében toporzékolva.

– Dehogy elég! dehogy elég. Hátra van még az utolsó vers: ez a java. Ez
gyógyít meg. «Addig is csókolom kegyelmednek a két piros orczáját
százszor meg ezerszer, igaz szeretettel.»

Damokos Tamás nem volt többé ember, veszett oroszlán volt, rárohant
dühösen a levélolvasóra, az egyik kezével kikapta a levelet a kezéből, a
másikkal pedig megragadta a torkát, s úgy rázta az asszonyt is, meg a
levelet is a két kezével, mintha egyik sem volna a másiknál ne hezebb.

– Hazugság! varázslat, pokoli szemfényvesztés volt az egész dolog.
Átkozott légy élve is, halva is, a ki ezt kigondoltad, boszorkány!

Azzal odadobta az asszonyt a levéllel együtt az alvó murzára, a ki erre
egy kissé felhagyott a horkolással.

Kalme csaknem halott volt, mikor Damokos Tamás kezéből kikerült.
Fuldokolva tért magához. És aztán térden csuszva mászott oda a kevély
férfi lábaihoz, a ki rabszolga létére úgy állt előtte, mint egy király,
mint egy boszuálló angyal.

– Bántottalak? rebegé alázatosan.

– Engem nem! De azt, a kit szeretek.

– A kit te szeretsz, meg van az szeretve!

– Ez mind káprázat! Gonosz cselszövény! Nem hiszem. Ez nem az én
feleségem. Mert az egy szent.

– Látom már, hogy milyen nagyon tudsz szeretni. Majd összeszaggattál
érte; engem, a ki oly nagyon szerettelek. – Szépen megöleltél –
fojtogató kézzel, de én ezért az ölelésért még jobban szeretlek. – Nem
kényszerítlek már, még csak nem is kérlek. Bocsátlak békével. Menekülj
magadban. Utad elkészítém. Itt van a szőrkötél, a min éjjel
leereszkedhetel az ablakból a sánczba, ott vár rád a hived, az
elcsufított arczu, két gyors paripával, ha nyugotnak tartasz folyvást,
eljuthatsz Erdélybe. Béke legyen veled, járj szerencsével. Elbocsátlak.

Damokos Tamás megrázta a fejét büszkén s félvállról szólt vissza, az
ajtónak fordulva.

– Én pedig nem szököm. Egyedül magam sem. Ha minden ajtó nyitva volna,
ha szárnyas paripa várna rám, a ki repül velem; még akkor sem. Mert egy
Damokos még soha nem lopott, nem csalt meg senkit. Én a Buzdurgán murza
rabja vagyok, a kinek kétezer aranyat kell értem kapni. Megigértem neki:
adósa vagyok vele. Ha elszököm tőle, szavamat szegtem meg; tolvaj, csaló
lettem: magam előtt meg kell utálnom magamat. Itt maradok a börtönömben.

Kalme összekulcsolt kezekkel rimánkodott előtte.

– Gondolj rá, hogy ha a murza fölébred, egész irtóztató dühét a fejedre
önti: rettentően fog veled bánni.

– Meggondoltam azt. Bizony készen vagyok rá. De azt is meggondoltam,
hogy ha én most magamat szökéssel megmentem, akkor az itt maradt ezernyi
ezer szegény rabtársamon fognak majd kegyetlen boszut állani. Az én
sorsomat viselem magam. A mi csupán nekem van szánva: érjen engem, senki
mást. Hozasd fel a ledobott lánczomat s veresd rám ujra. Börtönömbe
vágyom![3]

– Oh mi rettentő ember vagy te!

– Csak a többihez hasonló. Ha jót akarsz még velem tenni, hozasd fel a
lánczomat és zárj a börtönömbe, ne higyje a murza, ha fölébred, hogy
szökni akartam, a míg ő aludt.

– Hát erőnek erejével el akarsz pusztulni?

– Nem! Szentül hiszem, hogy holnap reggelig, a míg a murza fölébred,
megérkezik a váltságdíjam, a mit a feleségem elküldött.

Azzal elhagyta a murza háremszobáját Damokos Tamás s átment a zárkájába.

Kalme egész a börtönajtóig követte.

Ott megállt, az ajtó kilincsét a kezében tartva.

S aztán ezt mondá Tamásnak végbúcsú fejében:

– Köszönd Istenednek, hogy állhatatos voltál! Mert ha szép szavamnak
engedsz, ha szökni mégy magadban: én utánad küldök, szökőben fogatlak
el, mint hitszegő rabot, a kiből a kutyalelket aztán a korbács veri ki!

Azzal becsapta rá a börtönajtót.

– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – –

Hogy a váltságdíj nem érkezett meg másnap reggelre sem, s hogy mért nem
érkezett meg, azt már régen tudjuk.




AZ EGÉRFOGÓ.

Rájöttem én már arra, hogy a dicsőség nem ér egy fadorombot. Hannibal
cannaei diadala, meg azé a «névtelen hősé», ki a távgyaloglásban a
«viador» czímet elnyerte: egyformán hiábavalóság. Amaz megrontotta vele
Carthagot, emez meg a tüdejét. Jobb lett volna, ha otthon pipáztak volna
az alatt.

II. Rákóczy György fejedelem jenői diadala a törökökön épen ilyen
hiábavalóság volt. Dicsőségnek elég szép volt, hanem haszonnak semmi.
Mert ezzel a győzelemmel aztán egészen magára haragította II. György a
török szultánt, a ki azonnal kiküldte ellene magát a nagyvezért, erős
ármádiával Temesvár felől. Rákóczy György ennek nem volt elég erős
ellene állni, csak meghúzta magát Nagy-Váradra, onnan nézte el, hogy
capitulál az erős Jenő vára a nagyvezér előtt. A keleti határon pedig a
megfogyott székely lakosságon kívül épen senki sem akadt, a ki a tatár
khán hordáit feltartóztassa Erdélyről.

A mire jó, azaz hogy nagyon is rossz volt a jenői győzedelem, az lett,
hogy Rákóczy György most aztán a maga hiveit beküldé Erdélybe feles
csapatokkal s kihirdetteté, hogy a fejedelmi trónt ismét visszafoglalja.
A jó Rhédey Ferencz rögtön le is szállt róla s azt mondta: «tessék!» ő
maga megy haza a jószágára birkát nyiratni; a népet nyirja más!

De ellenben a rendek nem akarták II. Györgyöt visszafogadni, hanem
kikiáltották fejedelemnek Barcsay Ákost. Azt a török szultán rögtön meg
is erősítette s a temesvári basa sereget is adott a kezére, a kivel a
fejedelmi székét körülvegye.

Volt már tehát a szegény kis Erdélynek fejedelme három. Az égi jóslat a
négy nappal négyet igért: egynek még kell jönni hozzá, hogy ki legyen a
quadratum!

II. György aztán akkor azokat mind megnotázá, a kik a letevését kivánták
s a váraikat elfoglalva, azokba a saját őrségét helyezé el.

A székelyek mindvégig hivei maradtak II. Györgynek; nekik nem kellett se
Rhédey, se Barcsay.

Ezeket tehát nem kellett bántani Rákóczynak, csak a felől biztosítani
magát, hogy el ne pártoljanak tőle. E végből a saját legjobb hiveit
küldé oda a váraikba kapitányoknak, a kik az őrséget a hűségre
feleskették.

Egy szép napon Mikó-Ujváron is megjelent az új kapitány, kevés fegyveres
kisérettel. Ki is lett volna az más, mint Apor István uram?

Ilka asszony, a mint megérkeztének hírét vette, rögtön bezárkózék a
legbelső szobájába s betegnek mondatá magát.

Apor István, a tornácz erkélyére kiállva, felolvasá a székely vitézek
előtt a fejedelem parancsát, melyben kipróbált hűségüket az ő
szolgálatára bocsátja s őt a vár kapitányává és urává rendeli, a kinek
gondja lészen, hogy a betörő gonosz ellenség ellen a szegény lakosságot
fegyveres erővel megvédelmezze.

Ez pedig hogy ne tetszett volna a székelyeknek.

– Esküdjetek meg a fejedelem hűségére azonnal! parancsolá Apor István a
vitézeknek.

De azok csak súgtak-búgtak, utoljára felküldék a tornáczra a
hadnagyukat, Czirjék Boldizsárt, hogy beszéljen a fejével a kapitánynak.

– Adjon Isten, a mi nincsen; vegye el, a mi van! Kedves komám, Están
uram. Ugyan jó, hogy ma jött kegyelmed, nem tegnap, mert akkor ma már
«holnap» volna, s nem mondhatná a székely azt, hogy «ma nem». Mert hát,
tudja kegyelmed: «szóbul ért az ember!» aztán meg «több nap, mint
kolbász», az is igaz pedig, hogy «jobb egy lámpás elől, mint kettő
hátul», s «az oláh is okosabb a vásár után», azért azt tartják a
székelyek, hogy «kötve kell hinni a komának», mert «ember teszi a
fogadást, agg eb, ki megállja», pedig hát «az ökröt szarvánál, az embert
szavánál fogják meg», azért nehogy «szappant vegyünk sajt helyett»…

– Hadd el az ördögbe ezt a sok bolond példás beszédet, vágott közbe Apor
István, rukkolj ki vele magyarán, mi csipte meg a góbékat?

– Hát biz azok azért vakaróznak, hogy mindenképen szeretnék tudni, hogy
miféle állapotban került ide kegyelmed, hogy ennek a várnak ura legyen?
Hogy nem származik-e ebből majd Ilka asszonyra valami veszedelem? Mert
tudja kegyelmed, első ember az országban a fejedelem, de még annál is
elébb való az asszony. Azért, ha azzal a hatalommal jött ide kegyelmed,
hogy a fejedelem parancsolatjára Mikóujvárát dominiumostól Ilka
asszonytól elvegye s őtet gyermekeivel együtt abból kiforgassa, hát
akkor kevés ám ez a kis csapat vasfazekas fejű darabont itt körülötte a
székelyeknek, úgy kirakják innen velük együtt, hogy a lába sem éri a
földet. No úgy-e, már most kegyelmed is vakarja a fejét. Hát ott mi
csíp? Mondja!

– Gyere be velem a szobába, majd ottan elmondom. Addig küldd az őrséget
nyugodni.

– Köszönik szépen, elálldogálnak ők itten.

Apor István behivta magához Boldizsár bát s elment vele egész a szélső
gömbölyü torony szobájáig, a hol senki sem hallgathatja ki, hogy mit
beszélnek, ha csak nem madár, vagy denevér.

– Hát haragszunk-e még egymásra, öregem? kezdé a szót Apor István. (Ő
került a kis ajtó felől, mert tudta jól, hogy a székely «hadnagy», a
kinek ötszáz pixidarius lesi a parancsát, nagyobb úr, mint a «kapitány»,
a kinek csak húsz drabant áll a szolgálatára.)

Boldizsár bá a mellére tette a jobb kezét s így szólt:

– Isten úgy tartson, hogy szivemből kivántam, hogy újra megláthassam
kegyelmedet ebben a várban.

Ennek a szónak nagyon megörüle Apor István uram; a székely az Isten
nevét nem szokta hiába felvenni a nyelvére; s miután Boldizsár bá kezét
megszorongatván, arról is meggyőződött, hogy nincsen a markában valami
lengyel garas odaszorítva (mert ha az ott vagyon, akkor az eskü átka a
lengyel garast éri, nem az ő lelkét!), tehát egészen igaz szó volt, a
mit kimondott, annálfogva ő is igen nyájas lett hozzá s megczirogatá az
orczáját.

– No hát legyünk akkor, mint régi jó komák, ismét per tu.

– Meg se bánjuk. Én igaz hitemre mondom, nem csak azt kivántam, hogy
visszajöjj ide, de hogy itt is maradj.

– Hát hisz magam is azt óhajtom. Épen abban járok. Megmutatom neked
fejedelem ő nagysága levelét is, a melyben nekem condonálja egész
Mikó-Ujvárát, a hozzátartozó dominiummal együtt, mint a melyet
perduellióiért Damokos Tamásné fiscaliter elvesztett. Hiszen tudod azt a
casusát Szamosujvárott? Milyen asszonysereget hozott magával a
fejedelemre! Hogy betört a diaetába, s még a rendeket is kényszeríté,
hogy a fejedelmet detronálják, sőt annyira ment a vakmerősége, hogy még
a fejedelem lovának a zablájába is belekapott. Ha én akkor ott nem
vagyok! A fejedelem ezért őt megnotáztatta.

– Bizony Isten, nagy bolondság volt! erősíté Boldizsár bá. (Az ember ugy
is vehette, hogy a Damokosné cselekedete volt a nagy bolondság; úgy is,
hogy a fejedelemé volt az.) Hanem hát én is megmondom igazán, a mi a
szívemen van. Én sajnálom az Ilka hugomat, de különösen a két kis
ártatlan porontyát. S fáj a szívem érte, hogy így egyszerre árvákká,
földönfutókká legyenek. A Damokos Tamásnak már vége. Az nem élő ember
többé. Tudom a tatárok szokását. A kit szökésen kapnak, vagy a kiért a
sarczot meg nem hozzák Ór-Kapuba, mikor a foglyot odáig kivezették, az
nem jön emberszámba többé. Azt úgy elcsufitják, hogy nem marad rajta
emberi ábrázat s örök baromszolgaságba vetik, a hol a nehéz munka,
sanyaruság nagyhamar megöli. Szegény Tamás oda van már. Ilka asszony
özvegy lett már.

Apor István kivette a selyem zsebkendőjét, hogy megtörülje a szemeit
erre a szomorú hírre.

– Ne fujd az orrodat, mert veres lesz! mondá Boldizsár bá. Inkább
szóljunk vidámabb dolgokról. Ugy-e bár, valld meg igaz hitedre, hogy
most is szereted Damokos Tamásnét?

– Tudom már, mit akarsz ezzel? Hogy hát legjobb lenne, ha elvenném a
menyecskét, akkor ő is megmaradna a birtokában, én is úr lennék benne, a
fejedelem is visszavonná a megnotázást.

– Ejnye, de éles eszed van, komám!

– Hát hiszen nem hiába vagyok a fejedelem tanácsosa.

– Azért van hát olyan nagy szerencsében ő nagysága.

– Magam is tudnám én azt, hogy Ilkát meg kellene nyernem, mert azzal
együtt a székelyeknek a szívét is megnyerném, s aztán meg minden non
putarem eventualitásokra is biztos titulusom volna.

– Holmi fejedelemváltozás esetére, úgy-e?

– No igen. De még hogy a fődolgot megvalljam: bizony maga az asszony sem
megvetendő egy falat.

– De nem bizony! A régi világban tündérnek fogták volna el. Te! Mikor a
haját leereszti (én már láttam egyszer), hát egész a sarkáig ér.

– Ne ébreszgesd bennem az alvó oroszlánt! Úgy is szomjazom a szíve
vérét; de mit ér, ha ő tudni sem akar rólam. Addig meg sem kérhetem, a
míg Damokos Tamástól el nincs választva. Azt pedig, hogy a rabságba
rekedt férjétől elválaszszák, egyedül ő neki lehet kérni a szent
széktől: más azt nem teheti. Hol vegyek én annyi ékesszólást, a
mennyivel én Ilka asszonyt erre rábeszéljem? Holott annyira megy az
irántam való utálkodása, hogy még maga elé sem ereszt, hanem betegnek
mondatja magát s minden ajtót bezár előttem.

– Ez nagy bolondság tőle, mondá Czirjék. Mert már a Damokos Tamásról
egyszer le kell neki tenni. Akár így, akár úgy. Azt soha sem látja
többet. Mit is látna rajta? Csak elfutna tőle. Hidd el, hogy nem te
érted, hanem ő érte beszélek. Mert látom, hogy így elpusztul, s nincs
más menekülés a számára, mint a te karjaid közé. Ha beteg, hát meg kell
gyógyítani. Biz az orvosságot senki sem szereti: azért mégis csak
beadják. Tudnám én annak a módját, hogyan lehetne őt rákényszeríteni,
hogy ő maga adja mindenbe a beleegyezését.

– Ha tudod, ne rejtegesd! Mi az?

– Hát az executión kell kezdeni a processust.

– Ezt magam is felérem ököllel; de hiányzik a fődolog hozzá, mint tudod,
az «occasio bona!»

– No hát azt megszerzem én neked, ha rám bizod… A szép menyecskének a
hálószobája a kastély keleti gömbölyű tornyában van, a minek csak egy
ablaka nyitott, a mi a havas felé néz. Ehhez a szobához egy sötét
folyosó vezet, a mi a vastag várfalba úgy van beépítve, hogy a
cselédségből senki se tud róla. A folyosó bejáratát azon az oldalon, a
hol a fegyverterem van, egy szekrény takarja; abból nyilik egy alacsony
ajtó, a minek nálam a kulcsa. A másik végén a folyosónak pedig ismét van
egy ajtóforma fatábla. Arról ismét senkinek semmi tudomása nincsen, mert
a hálószobában ezt a bejáratot egy nagy velenczei tükör fedezi. Ez előtt
a tükör előtt szokta Ilka asszony éjszakára a haját kibontani, s újra
befonni.

– Hát te ezt honnan tudod?

– Ej no. A fatábla végig van hasadva s a tükör hátuljáról egy helyen
levált az ezüst.

– Hej te vén, gaz kópé! Magad is leskelődtél már a szép menyecske után
egyszer-másszor!

– Ugyan ne ungorkodj! Hát akkor sem vétettem vele senkinek. No hát értsd
meg tovább. A szobában világos szokott lenni, mert egész éjjel ég a
mécses. Láthatod, hogy mikor jött el az időd. Az a tükrös tábla azonban
nem nyilik kulcscsal, hanem alul van egy fordító retesze; a mint azt
szépen elcsavarod, a tábla elfordul a sarkában s nyitva az utad a
szobába. Akkor aztán, hogy miként viseled magadat? ha nem tudnád, vedd
elő Cornelius Agrippa könyvecskéjét «de vanitate scientiarum», abból
kikeresheted.

Apor István uram egészen fel volt villanyozva ezen hamis furfang által.

– Adsza azt a kulcsot.

– Hohó, komám. Csakk lassan a testtel! Szegődött bér osztott koncz.
Krisztust sem árulták el ingyen. Előbb én is itt vagyok ám.

– Ha sikerül a practicád, bizony jól megjutalmazlak érte.

– Mi az a «jól?»

– Meghagylak a hadnagyi tisztedben, s inscribálok neked három portát.

– Jól van. Hanem azt add irásban.

Apor István megirta a kötést, meg is pecsételte: azt Czirjék Boldizsár
eltette a tarsolyába. Akkor aztán elvezette a tanácsos urat és kapitányt
a czímerterembe, ott a szeme láttára félretolta az emlitett szekrényt,
felnyitotta a kis ajtót, végig világítva egy szövétnekkel a keskeny
rejtek folyosón, a mi annak a háta mögött nyilt. Aztán odaadta a kis
aranyozott kulcsot Apor Istvánnak.

– Tehát csak okosan és merészen. Aztán ha lakodalomra kerül a sor, engem
ki ne felejts belőle. Most pedig gyerünk, eskessük fel a hűségre a
székelyeket.

Ez az utolsó szó egészen meggyőzte Apor Istvánt a felől, hogy Czirjék
igaz jó akaró embere.

Hiszen nincs abban semmi gonoszság, a mit az most eképen kifundált. A
szegény Damokos Tamás kárbaveszett, azon már nem lehet segíteni; a
nyomorult asszonynak inkább kell új férjről, istápról gondoskodni, a
kivel egyúttal a birtokát is megmentheti. Nincs most idő hosszadalmas
turbékolásra, «susogóra»; practice kell a dologhoz hozzáfogni. Ha Apor
István Ilka asszonynak a hálószobájába éjjel bejuthatott, onnan csak
mint jövendőbeli férj jöhet ki. Igen jól van az kiszámítva, brutális, de
egyenes mód! Magának is van benne érdeke a lúfőnek!

Alig is várhatta Apor István, hogy beesteledjék. A székelyek felől,
miután felesküdtek a hűségére, egészen biztos lehetett; esküjét a
székely soha meg nem szegi, ha a nyaka utána szakad is. Csak utána kell
nyulni az érett gyümölcsnek, s minden a kezében marad.

Mégis nagyobb bátorság okáért azt a husz drabantot, a kiket a fejedelmi
szász testőrségből magával hozott, oda rendelé fel a czímerterem előtti
tornáczba, hogy ott legyenek éjjel, így egészen bizonyos lehetett a
terve sikerüléséről.

A mint elharangozták az esteli angelust, bezárá belülről a fegyverterem
ajtajait, s azután a rejtekajtón át behatolt egy viaszgyertya világa
mellett a keskeny folyosóba.

A csizmáit is lehúzta, hogy a lépteinek semmi hangja el ne árulja
közeledését. A folyosó túlsó végéhez érve, aztán elfujta a gyertyát,
észrevéve, hogy a Czirjék említette hasadékon át világosság szüremlik
keresztül.

Odalopózott az áruló hasadékhoz, a honnan a világosság derengett. A
tüköramalgama kopásán keresztül egészen végig láthatott az ágyasházon.

Ott volt a fülkében, nehéz függönyökkel beárnyékozva, Ilka asszony
özvegy nyoszolyája; mellette egy kisebb kárpitos ágy, a két kis gyermek
alvó helye. Épen most fekteti le őket. Maga vetkőzteti, megimádkoztatja:
«Szegény jó apánkat őrizze az Isten minden veszedelemtől, hozza vissza
friss jó egészségben.» Anyjuk megcsókolgatja mind a kettőt. Azok még
sokáig elvihánczolnak az ágyban, gyermekek módjára.

– Nem tudtok már eldögleni, fattyuk! – mormogja magában a türelmetlen
leskelődő.

Pedig még sok végigvárni való van. Mikor a gyermekek elpihennek, maga
Ilka asszony veszi elő a kapcsos imakönyvet s letérdelve az Istenanya
képe elé, hosszan, keservesen, könyhullatások közt imádkozik.

– Mit tud annyit könyörögni annak a festett képnek?

De még aztán egy másik festett kép is előkerül; arany keretbe foglalt
elefántcsontra festett miniatur-arczkép. Azzal is sokáig el kell
beszélgetni, meg-megcsókolgatni, szivéhez szorongatni. Ez bizonyosan
Damokos Tamás képe.

A felébredt oroszlán dühét ez még csak ingerli.

Végre aztán mégis rászánja magát a szép nő a lefekvésre, maga
levetkőzik, nem kell neki cselédsegítség. Lebontja a szép hosszú haját,
hogy újra befonja, s nagyot bámul rajta, hogy egy szál ősz hajat talál
közte: ez akkor támadt, mikor hirét hozták, hogy a férjeért küldött
váltságdijat elrabolták. Hiszen még alig huszonnégy éves! S már itt van
az ősz szál.

A leskelődő lator lihegve emészti sovár szemével a deli hölgy bájait.
Türelmetlen is már. Alig birja magát addig tartóztatni, mig a nő ágya
félfüggönyét maga fölé húzta, csak a másikat hagyva feltárva, hogy onnan
fekhelyéről a gyermekekre lásson. Aztán félkarját a feje fölé emeli, az
arczát ráfekteti s Istenben elalszik.

– No most itt van az én időm! mondja magában Apor István, elfordítva a
csavarreteszt a deszkapad alján, a hogy Czirjék megtanította rá, s abban
a szent perczben – kiesik a föld a lába alól, s ő az elbillenő padlóról
lezuhan valami nagy sötét mélységbe.

Szerencséje, hogy szalmára esett: nem törte se kezét, se lábát.

Hanem a zörejre fölébredt Ilka asszony s kiugorva az ágyából, azt kérdé:
«Ki jár ott?»

Arra ugyan neki a háborgató meg nem felelhetett, mert az valami három
ölnyi mélységben kuczorgott, a hová nem hat le se szó, se világosság; de
a földalatti kajabajának még is fel kellett hozzá törni még a vastag
bástyafalon keresztül is, a mibe az a sülyesztő volt lemélyitve, a hová
Apor István leesett. Valami régi kincstartó rejtek volt az, a melyben az
első Mikó a drágaságait dugdosá, s a mi felől csak Czirjéknek volt
tudomása; hanem a furfangos sóhajhidat már ő csinálta hozzá a régi
csapóajtó helyett s a levezető lajtorját is kihúzta belőle. Akkor
végezte ő ezt az egész munkát, a mikor Ilka asszony Szamosujvárt járt
diaetát és fejedelmet regulázni. A mint a jenői győzelemnek hire
terjedt, rögtön megsejté Boldizsár bá, mi lesz ennek a következése? A
győzelmes fejedelem visszajön, – Damokosnét megnótázzák, – Mikóujvárt
elkobozzák tőle, – azt pedig senki se kapja meg más, mint Apor István, a
kinek mindig fájt rá a foga, – az idejön várat, birtokot elfoglalni, ha
egyszer itt lesz, az ő luxuriosus természeténél fogva könnyű lesz őt
belecsalni ebbe az egérfogóba: mivel aztán az ezermesternek még
messzebblátó czéljai voltak.

Azonban a megmagyarázhatlan zajra Ilka asszony hirtelen magára kapkodta
a ruháit, s a cselédjeit készült felkelteni, a midőn a hálószobája
ajtaján halk kopogtatást hall.

– Ki van az ajtón?

– Én vagyok itt, édes lelkem, a Boldizsár bátyád. Ébren vagy-e?

Ilka asszony sietett felnyitni az ajtót.

– Ugyan jó, hogy már felöltözve talállak, édes mézem. Csak költsd fel a
kis gyermekeket is, s öltöztesd fel. Futnunk kell innen!

Ilka asszony a lába alatt zakatoló zörejre figyelmezteté.

– Mi van ott? Soha sem hallottam itt semmi neszt még.

– Patkány került a csapdába. Hadd kaparjon. Te csak szedd össze
hirtelen, a mi drágaságod van, rakd egy bőriszákba; a legdrábbakat, a
kis porontyokat, jól fel is öltöztesd, befogva a hintód: éjjeli útra
megyünk, Brassóig meg sem állunk.

– Az történt meg, a miről beszéltünk?

– Az. Tégedet megnotáztak. Apor Istvánnak adták a váradat, birtokodat.
Ha magad is az övé nem akarsz lenni, akkor fuss innen.

– De hová?

– Majd megmondom, ha az úton leszünk. Egész odáig, a hol már a világ be
van deszkázva. De most siess! Majd én elvégzem a magam dolgát azzal, a
ki idelenn zakatol.

Ilka asszony hirtelen felölelte a gyermekeket az ágyukból s kifutott
velök a cselédjeihez. Egészen agyon volt rémülve, s féltette őket ebben
a kisértetes szobában.

Boldizsár bá pedig, mikor egyedül maradt ott, félretolta a helyéből a
nagy fali tükröt s kezébe véve az éjjeli mécsest, levilágított vele a
mély bástyaüregbe.

– No kedves komám, nem ütötted-e meg magadat?

Hathatós káromkodás volt rá a felelet.

– Látod, így jár ám az, a ki a tiltott gyümölcs után ágaskodik. Dejszen
döngetheted azt a falat! Egy öl széles az elől is hátul is. Nem hallik
ki innen semmi kiáltás. Jobb lesz, ha szépen megalkuszol velem, ha ki
akarsz innen kerülni valaha.

– Mi kell? Haramia! Kiált fel onnan alulról a fogoly.

– Mi kell? Kitaláltad. «Haramia.» Azt mondd meg nekem azonnal, hogy
kinek hivják igazi néven a Munduka Ravaselt? a ki a Damokos Tamás
váltságát elrabolta s hol találok rá minden bizonynyal.

– Mit tudom én?

– Hát csak törd rajta a fejed; ha elfelejtetted, míg eszedbe jut, mert
nekem nem hosszú az idő idefenn rávárnom, a míg megmondod: ha neked nem
hosszú. Te neked tudnod kell azt! S ha most jóllakva nem jut eszedbe,
majd eszedbe jut éhomra, mert én addig meg nem mondom, hogy hol van a
pékbolt, ahol czipót vehetsz, – oda lenn a sutban.

– Csak nem akarsz éhen megölni?

– Ne akarj éhen meghalni. De én bizony alább nem adom a czipót,
megmondtam az árát.

– No hát vigyen el az ördög. Zernyesten lakik Brassó mellett, Dimbora
Lupujnak hívják.

– Úgy? Jól ismerem. Derék, becsületes biróviselt ember. Hát annál vannak
az elrabolt aranyok?

– Azt nem tudom.

– Dehogy nem tudod! Vajjon hol tartja őket?

– Az ördög jobban tudja.

– Könnyű neked odalenn a pokolban az ördögöt emlegetni. Hát kérdezd meg
tőle, közelebb vagy hozzá mint én. Különben, bizony Isten, itt maradsz
itéletnapig.

– No hát süketülj meg tőle! Egy hosszú oláh tilinkóba vannak belerakva,
az ott lóg az ágya fölött a falon. Vedd el tőle! mit bánom én? süsd meg!

– Hát hiszen meg is sütöm én azt, csak megkapjam

– No már most adj le egy létrát, hadd megyek fel.

– Jaj de házsártos vagy, kedves komám; pedig még csak most kerültél le s
már is ki akarsz jönni! Hátha, mint a szegény Damokos Tamásnak, esztendő
számra ott kellene taposnod a csávát a keserű rabságban! Nem megy az
olyan hamar! Várnod kell egy kisség! Előbb én majd elmegyek a Mundukát
felkeresni. Téged addiglan itt hagylak. Ne félj semmit, nem halsz éhen.
Ha a szalmát félrehárítod a lábad alól, találsz egy csapó-ajtóra, azt a
vaskarikájánál fogva felemeled, s azon bejutsz egy gádorba, a melyik egy
csinos kis boltba vezet. Az lesz a te ideiglenes lakásod ebben a várban.
Van nálad tűzszerszám, ott találsz gyertyát is, nem maradsz sötétben;
meglátod, van enni-inni való akár két hétre is. Én az alatt csak
megkapom a Mundukát. Ha az igazi nevet mondtad, akkor bizonynyal
megkapom. Hogy a pénzt hogy veszem el tőle, az aztán az én gondom. Akkor
azután rögtön hirmondót futtatok ide a hadnagyokhoz, hogy hol keressék a
kapitányukat, a kik bizonyára addiglan, ha eget-földet egygyé tesznek,
sem akadnak rád sehol. Ha azonban nem az igazi nevet adád tudtomra:
akkor visszajövök ide, erre a szent helyre s megint lekiáltok hozzád:
«hol vagy Ádám!» jer elő, ne hazudj igazán, ki a Munduka Ravasel? S ezt
mind addig újra ismételem, a míg csak te meg nem unod.

– Az igazi nevet mondtam. Dörmögé a mélységbe jutott.

– No hát akkor béke legyen veled! Ha látlak, lássalak friss jó
egészségben.

Ezzel lecsukta a fogolyra az elbillenő ajtót; helyre fordítá a csavaró
reteszt; a nyilástzáró táblát a belső tükörrel együtt helyére tolá s
aztán végighaladva a rejtek folyosón, kijött a czimerterembe; a nehéz
szekrényt megint a rejtekajtó elé tolta, s valamennyi szobán keresztül
sétálva, végig ballagott a külső tornáczon, úgy került Damokos Tamásné
elé, a ki azt hitte, hogy boszorkányság van a dologban: mivelhogy a
toronyszobából lehetetlen más ajtón kijönni valakinek, mint a melyen
bement. Merre jött ki az ágyasházból?

– Repültem galambom! magyarázá Boldizsár bá. De most már repüljünk
veletek együtt, a míg a csillagokban tart.

Azzal a két kis gyermeket a karjaikra vették, a kisebbiket az anyjuk, a
nagyobbikat Boldizsár bá s levitték őket a hintóhoz. A nagyobbik
nyügösködött. «Minek költöttek fel? Olyan jót álmodtam. Az apámnál
voltam».

– Ő nála fogsz lenni kicsikém nem soká! – mondá Boldizsár bá –
odaviszlek hozzá!

– Minek bolondítja ezzel a szegény gyermeket? – feddé Ilka asszony.

– Igazat mondtam én. Bizony odamegyünk! Damokos Tamáshoz!

Ezért a szóért aztán mind a hárman a nyakába borultak, anya és két
gyermek és összecsókolták.

– Igaz ez? igaz ez?

– Ha én mondom, hát igaz!




A DRÁKU POPI.

Utközben Boldizsár bá elmondott Ilka asszonynak a megtörténtekből, s az
ezután tervbe vett dolgokból annyit, a mennyibe azt szükséges volt
beavatni. Megtudta már Aportól, hogy mi az igazi neve Mundukának? hol
kapható meg, és az elrabolt aranyak hova vannak elrejtve?

– Tehát mégis az ő tudtával történt! szörnyűködék Ilka asszony.

– Bocsásd meg néki, szentem. Az irántad való szerelem vitte rá, nem
valami nemtelen indulat.

– Pokolra jusson érette!

– «Ott» van már, ne kivánd még mélyebbre. Szépen birtokba vette a
váradat, mondhatom: csak hadd üljön ott. Nem tart az sokáig, pünkösdi
királyság lesz az, két ellen fejedelmünk már van, mire visszakerülünk
Krimiából, negyedik is lesz, az majd kiveri valamennyit. Hanem most
legelébb is az a főgondunk, hogy Mundukától visszakapjuk a pénzt.

– Rögtön jelentse föl kegyelmed a brassói királybirónál, hogy fogassa el
az embert.

– Dehogy jelentem, édes mézem! hisz az annyi volna, mintha rókát akarnék
fogni s kolompot akasztanék a nyakamba. Majd kikerítem én azt királybiró
nélkül, egy nap köze alatt. A ki az emberek bölcsességére számít, az
bizony csúfot lát; hanem aki a bolondságukra számít, az mindig czélba
talál.

Ilka asszony tehát egészen rábizta az ügyet Boldizsár bára.

Másnap délre bevergődének szerencsésen Brassóba. Boldizsár bá azonban
nem hajtatott a belvárosba, a hol igen díszes vendégfogadók valának;
hanem kinn maradt Bolgárszegen. Ez egyik külvárosa Brassónak, a mit
akkor csupa görögök laktak. A legélelmesebb és leghasznosabb népfaj, a
mi csak Magyarországra bevándorolt. Itt bolgároknak nevezték akkoriban
őket; de valóságra macedon görögök voltak. Az ő kezükben volt az egész
kereskedés, Magyarország és a keleti népek között. Kincsek özönlöttek a
kezeiken át Magyarországra. Szerették is őket a királyok és fejedelmek,
s erős kiváltságokkal keríték őket körül. Ezek közé tartozott, hogy a
görögök saját birót választottak magok közül, a ki kereskedelmi
ügyeikben itéletet hozott. Ebben az időben Nogáli uram volt a görög
biró. Boldizsár bá egyenesen az ő udvarára hajtatott be. Itt minden ház
bolt volt és vendégfogadó. Lehetett kapni akár egy ital pálinkát, akár
egy vég posztót, akár egész ellátást, kocsival, lóval, jutányosan,
becsületes árért. Szivesen látták a vendéget, a gazda együtt ebédelt,
vacsorált vele: mikor odább akart menni, megcsinálta neki a számláját, a
min magának nyeresége sem volt; engedelmet kért tőle, hogy ilyen sokra
megy a csekélység, a mit szolgáltatott, s ha azt mondta a vendég, hogy
most nincsen pénze, hát «az Isten áldja meg! majd megadja, ha visszajön
megint.» A székelyek legörömestebb is csak ideszálltak Bolgárszegre, ha
Brassóban vala dolguk.

Nogáli uram különben is régi jó ismerőse volt a Damokos-családnak, a
buzát, gyapjut ő szokta tőlük megvenni, s viszont kelmével,
fűszerszámmal ő látta el a házat. Nagyon örült is, mikor Boldizsár bát
meglátta Damokosnéval, meg a két kis fiucskával. Ő maga segített a nagy
böröndöt behozni Boldizsárnak. «Az ilyent nem kell cselédre bizni!
észreveszi az emeléséről, hogy arany-ezüst van benne.»

– Biz a van ebben, mondá Boldizsár bá. A Damokosok minden családi kincse
itt van. György fejedelem megnótáztatta a hugomasszonyt, s most futnunk
kell az országból.

– Tudom, tudom. Mondá a görög. Az Isten áldja meg őtet a nótájával! Majd
mi tánczolunk azon. Hát csak hagyjátok itt nálam ezeket a kincseket
most: ne vigyétek magatokkal, mert bizony elveszik tőletek vagy a
zsiványok, vagy a tatárok. Itt ólálkodnak ám már a szomszédban. Én adok
rá nektek majd pénzt, a mennyi kell. Tudom, mi van a ládában. Ismerem
minden darabját. Lehet rá kölcsön adni kétezer aranyat. Nem kérek sokat
érte; egy oszporát egy aranyért, a mig visszafizetik. Ha egy hónap
mulva, vagy kettő mulva, vagy egy esztendő mulva. Azért csak egy
oszporát.

Damokos Tamásné bízony megadott volna akár egy dénárt is szives örömest
a kölcsönajánlott két ezer aranyért darabonkint.

– Itt én nálam biztos helyen lesz ám a kincsetek, ne féljetek. Ide nem
jön a tatár. Van mi nekünk olyan abrakunk, a mit ha a tatár lovának
adunk, hát elmegy tőle másfelé; Brassót kikerüli. Megtanulták már a
brassóiak, hogy vassal nem jó verekedni, ezüsttel sokkal jobb.

– De hátha ezt a kétezer aranyat is elrabolják tőlünk a zsiványok, mint
a multkorit? aggságoskodék Ilka asszony.

– Miért nem szóltatok nekem? Nekem kellett volna szólni! Én nem adok ám
a kezetekbe pénzt; egy oszporát sem. Nem kell az embernek az útra pénzt
vinni magával; mert mikor előveszi az erszényét, hogy fizessen:
meglátják, s agyonütik érte. Hanem majd adok én nektek egy pecsétes
levelet, jóféle pergamenre irva, ezzel aztán elmehettek Bukarestbe,
Galaczba, Bakcsi Száraiba, majd felirom a neveiket, kikhez? Annak ott
megmutatjátok ezt a levelet, s megmondjátok neki, hogy mennyi pénzt
fizessen helyettetek ennek meg amannak. Az felirja erre a levélre, a mit
kifizetett, ti meg irást adtok neki róla. Mikor visszakerültök, ezzel a
levéllel beszámoltok nekem, s akkor megtudjuk, hogy melyikünk tartozik a
másiknak? Igy az egész uton senki egy tallért sem lát a tenyeretekben;
mégis mindig lesz pénzetek. Ezt a levelet pedig hiába rabolná el tőletek
akárki, mert ez csak Damokos Tamásné asszonyomnak a nevére szól; a kit
aztán a keze irásáról ismernek meg az én embereim minden városban. Ha
akarjátok, Bagdádig elküldelek benneteket ilyen szép szerével.

Oda azonban ők nem akarának utazni, hanem csak Krimiáig, Buzdurgán murza
uram palotájáig.

Ilka asszony tehát egészen tele volt megelégedéssel, mikor ennyit
megértett Nogáli uramtól. Meg volna tehát a váltságdíj ismét; a kétezer
arany. Erre a módjára a szabadulásnak bizony hamarább is gondolhatott
volna! Vádolta most már a lelke, hogy minek kapkodott a fejedelem lova
zablyájához? miért nem kereste fel inkább azonnal Nógáli uramat? Mennyi
idő kárbaveszett ezzel. Sőt a birtokát is elkobozták miatta. – No majd
az urának visszaadják, ha előkerül Krimiából, hisz az nem vétett Rákóczy
Györgynek semmit, sőt inkább az ő hűségeért szenved.

Boldizsár bá azonban egy szóval sem árulta el Nogálinak, hogy vagynak
még más kétezer aranyak is, a mikre bizonyosan számit. Azt kell
kicsikarni! De nem szólt senkinek. Azt mondta, elmegy körültekinteni
alkalmatosság után. Ellenben csak azt várta, hogy besötétedjék. Akkor
egy batyuba kötözött mindent, a mire szüksége volt. Ha valaki rajta
kapta volna, de elbámult volna rajta, hogy micsoda furcsa dolgokat
szedett össze az ezermester? Mi lesz ebből? Egy bivalybőr szarvastul,
sörényestül, egy hosszú tülök, egy négyszegletü bádogszelencze. Vajjon
mire lesznek mindezek használhatók?

Azt ő tudta. A mint sötét lett, felvette a batyut a hátára; vándor
olajkárosok módjára a köpönyegét a batyu fölé takarta, s aztán egy
hosszú szeges bottal a kezében, elindult Zernyest felé.

Nem kellett neki tudakozódni, tudta jól az utat. Minden házat ismert.

Éjfélre kukorítottak a kakasok, mikor a falu közepéig eljutott, a hol az
ő emberének a háza volt. Azt is ismerte ő személyesen. Sokszor ittak
egymásnak a kulacsából. Ki hitte volna róla, hogy ilyen gonosz szellem
lakik benne?

Zernyestfalva és egész határa akkoriban mind Brassó tulajdona volt. A
falu félmértföldnyi hosszúságban nyúlik végig a Riu patak partján, más
része meg el van szórva a havasok között; azt odafenn vad, pásztornép
lakja, a ki még papot sem lát soha s vándorol a nyájával, keresztülkasul
a hegyeken, nem kérdezve, hol Erdély, hol Oláhország? az idelenn lakók
pedig fuvarozásból élnek. Befognak tizenkét, tizenhat lovat egy óriási
társzekér elé, s azt megrakva brassói kelmékkel, elvontatják Bécsig vagy
Galaczig, mindig útban vannak. Zavaros időkben pedig halásznak is! de
nem a Riu patakban, hanem a «zavarosban». Egy olyan név, mint a «Munduka
Ravasel», nem is valami megszégyenítő arra nézve, a ki azt hiressé
tette. Csak olyan az, mint a hajdankorban a rablólovagok viselete volt.
Még népballadák is dicsőítik. Egy ilyen híres kalandor, Deli Marko,
egész ütközetet vívott Báthory Gáborral s meg is verte (a szászok
segélyével) a fejedelmet. (A «Deli Marko» név mindenütt népszerű.)

Boldizsár bá bizonyos lehetett felőle, hogy Dimbora Lupujt otthon
találja. Az nem jár fuvarozni.

A háza ott van egy domboldalban, óriási diófáktól betakarva. Kerítése
nincsen, még egy kutyát sem tart. Nem fenyegeti őt itten veszedelem; s
ha fenyegetné, gyorsan tudósítják róla. Nagy hire van óriási erejének:
az bánná meg, a ki reá törne.

Dehogy is jött ellene Boldizsár bá erőhatalommal. Brassó valamennyi
drabantja el nem nyomná a Mundukát, ha az megharagszik.

A Dimbora Lupuj háza, a hogy oláh nemes uraké szokott fabrikálva lenni,
alul kőből épült, arra vezetett fel egy lépcsős tornácz; a fölött azután
szép simára gyalult tölgyfából volt emelve a lakóház, czifrán kifestett
ajtó-, ablakfákkal, a teteje magasabb volt magánál a háznál, singnyi
zsindelyekkel fedve, a két ormán két nagy szarvasagancscsal.

Boldizsár bá a csendes éjszakában toilettet csinált a diófa alatt;
felvette a bivalybőrt, a szarvasfejbőrt a fejére húzva, ebben a riasztó
alakban indult meg a Munduka látogatására.

Ismerte a dörgést: ott alszik ő kegyelme a hátsó szobában, a honnan az
erdőre lehet látni és menekülni. Az ablaka mindig nyitva, még télen is.
Úgy alszik ott a déczbunda alatt, a nagy báránybőr süveggel a fején.

Boldizsár bá a nagy hársfahéj szótülköt betolva az ablakon át a szobába,
pokolbeli hangon mormogá: «Munduka Ravasel!»

A déczbunda megmozdult, a báránybőrsüveg felütötte a fejét. Dimbora
Lupuj felébredt a hős nevének említésére álmából.

Haj, de hirtelen lehúzta a fejét megint a bunda alá, mert az, a mit
látott, bizony a legkeményebb szivet is megpróbálná! Ott tánczolt a
falon fényes karika közepében egy nagy fekete ördög, előre görbült két
szarvval, hosszan kilógó piros nyelvvel, tüzes vasvillával a kezében; a
farkába pedig három ördögfiu kapaszkodott, az egyik piros, a másik zöld,
a harmadik sárga, az egyiknek bagolyfeje volt, a másiknak hiuz feje, a
harmadiknak sündisznófeje. Az öreg ördög mormogott, az aprók pedig igen
illetlen hangokat adogattak közbe.

«Jajh! uram irgalmazz!» didergé fogvaczogva a rablóhős.

«Munduka Ravasel! mormogá az ördög. Készen vagy-e a halálra? Jöszte
velem! viszlek a pokolba».

«Ne még, uram, dráku! csak egy napig kegyelmezz. Nagyon sok a bűnöm!»

«Tudom! Fel van nálam írva, Én vagyok a «draku popi».

Ez a «pap ördöge» ama titokteljes személy, a ki eljár az ablakra, a hol
lopott pénzt érez s kiköveteli azt a primus acquisitortól. Furcsa
incassator!

– Jaj, mondd meg, mit kivánsz?

«Add ide azt a furulyát az ágyad fölül» dörmögé az ördög.

«Jaj! uram dráku, az sok lesz. Érd be felével!»

«Ne alkudj! Adod-e mindjárt? Vagy szekérrel jöjjek?»

Hangzott is már a pokolbeli paripák, a sárkányok prüsszögése: a kerek
fényszérű közepébe ott a falon egyszerre csak beugrott egy tűzokádó
sárkány: tüzes szekérrel; abban ült a poklok királya, tüzes koronával a
fején.

Munduka Ravasel látta, hogy itt életre és pokolra megy a harcz. Nem volt
ő gyáva ember. Tudta védelmezni magát. Még az ördög ellen is tudta.
Bizonyos volt felőle, hogy ha ő azt a szentelt viaszgyertyát ott a Szent
György kép előtt meggyujthatja, attól egyszerre el kell futni minden
pokolbeli hatalomnak. Kimászott négykézláb az ágyából; elvánszorgott a
pestesig, azon még parázs volt; a kénfonalat bedugta s folyvást
imádkozva és könyörögve, odacsúszott térden a szent képig s akkor aztán
meggyujtotta a viaszgyertyát.

De ebben a pillanatban egy olyan tűzsugárt okádott a sárkány a szeme
közé, hogy attól a gyertya is elaludt, s szakálla, bajusza mind
leperzselődött.

«Munduka! Munduka! Ne bolondozz a pokol tüzével», tanácslá mély hangon
az ördög. A sárkány pedig prüszkölt és nagyokat horkantott.

– Jaj nekem! Adom már! nyöszörgött a rablóvezér. Harmincz mértföldnyire
eredj tőlem!

– Mihelyt a furulyád ide adod.

– Nesze fogd meg.

Boldizsár bá érezé a nehézségéről, hogy annak aranynyal kell tele lenni.

Akkor aztán még egy pokolbeli káromkodást mondott a rablónak:
«Quadrupedanteputremcrepituquatitungulacampum!» a mi valami rettenetes
átokmondás lehet; Munduka az ágy alá menekült tőle rémültében; arra
aztán az ördög is elkocsikázott a maga sárkányfogatával, rémséges
gyantaillatot hagyva maga után, fejedelmi szokása szerint.

– No hát! Mondá magában Boldizsár bá, mikor reggelre szerencsésen haza
került Bolgárszegre, s a megdugasztalanított hosszú tilinkóból kiönté
Nogáli uram asztalára a kétezer aranyakat. Valamennyi biró,
polgármester, syndicus, hadnagy, darabant, mind összeverte volna a
fejét, még se csikarta volna ki Munduka Ravasel uram markából ezt a
pénzt, a hogy én kivasaltam tőle egy bivalybőrrel, egy tülökkel, egy
laterna magicával, meg egy kis törött gyantával!

Azzal aztán elmesélte az egészet, hogyan történt, el is producálta a
bűvlámpa csodaműveleteit; a mi a kis gyermekeknek különösen megtetszett.
Persze ők még nem vétettek az ördögnek, tehát nem féltek tőle.

Mindebből pedig az a tanulság: hogy az ördögre nagy szükség van ezen a
világon; azért mi a mi ördögünket nem engedjük tőlünk eldisputáltatni a
tudósoktól.

– Ez hát nagyon jól jött így, mondá Nogáli uram. Már most ezt a pénzt
egészen a váltságdíjra adhatjátok, a mit a zálogra felvesztek tőlem, az
csak az utiköltségre kell majd. Hanem azt tanácsolom, hogy mindjárt útra
keljetek; mert a Munduka, ha egy csomó elrablott pénzt kiadott a draku
popinak, az addig nem nyugszik ám, míg helyette még egyszer annyit nem
rabol. Neki mindenütt kémei vannak, a kik tudósítják, ki utazik a
vámokon keresztül, mennyi őrizetet vitt magával. Ha Damokosné asszonyom
utazását megtudja, szentül azt hiszi, hogy sok pénzt viszen magával,
azért ne is menjetek ti a vám felé a szoroson keresztül a rendes
országúton. Majd elküldelek én benneteket másfelé, a merre a világnak
nincsen szája. Vannak én nekem egynehány lovas leányaim, a kik
megszokták a havasi utakat járni (a miken egykor a jó Tökölyi betört a
német seregekre.) De ne gondoljatok ám valami rosszat felőlem. Csak azt
corrigálom ki, a mit a szász urak beletettek a törvényeinkbe, hogy
nekünk görögöknek nem szabad kényesőt, meg salétromot szállítani ki az
országból; hanem csak ő nekik. Hát az az én kényeső meg salétromszállító
utam, az ő kegyes engedelmük nélkül. Ezen az úton olyan szépen
kivezetnek titeket az én szolgálóim (én nem tartok férfiszolgát, az mind
tolvaj, pákosz, veszekedő), még a madár se szólít meg benneteket egész
Plojestig. Onnan aztán csak egy hajtás Bukarest. Lóháton odáig, ott
megint szekeret fogadtok, azzal mentek Gyurgyevóig. Rövidebb volna ugyan
az út Foksánnak, s úgy Brailának, de ez most tele van errefelé nyomakodó
tatárseregekkel, azokra nem jó lenne szembemenni. Azért kell azt a
kerülőt tennetek, hogy a veszedelemnek kitérjetek útjából. Onnan aztán
evezős hajóval leereszkedtek Galaczig, ott kaptok vitorlás hajót, az én
embereim eligazítanak, s ha Isten segít, két hét mulva ott lesztek az
akhtiari kikötőben.

– Eddig is megsegített csodatételével, ezután is majd megsegít az Isten,
mondá kegyes szóval Ilka asszony.

Ebben aztán megnyugodtak.




VAN ISTEN A FÖLD ALATT IS!

Boldizsár bá azonnal levelet ira a mikóujvári hadnagynak, melyben
tudtára adá, hogy hol keressék az eltünt várkapitányt, Apor István
uramat s miféle furfanggal jussanak hozzá az ő nagyrabecsült
személyéhez, a kinek azóta már fogytán lehet az elemózsiája; de különben
sem kellemetes a tartózkodási helye. Egyébiránt köszönteti ő méltóságát,
a furulyát megkapá s igen szép nótákat fujdogál rajta. A mit ő jobban
meg fog érteni stb. stb.

Csakhogy erre a levélre már akkor semmi szüksége sem volt Apor István
uramnak.

A csaptatóba jutott főkapitány úr ugyanis sehogy sem akart belenyugodni
a maga kellemetlen állapotába. Boszantotta nagyon, hogy ilyen együgyü
módon engedte magát a concupiscentiája kötőfékénél fogva belevezettetni
a kelepczébe. Ha ez kisül, az egész világ példája lesz belőle;
kicsúfolják, kinevetik, még a fejedelem sem fogja többé semmi dolgát
rábízni. Hiába mondja, hogy hiszen Oroszlánszivű Richardot is elfogták,
azért még is csak őt fogják kigúnyolni. Nem várja ő, hogy érte jöjjenek,
hanem kitör innen. Vele volt az evőszerszáma, azt szokás volt ezüst
tokban magával vinni mindenkinek. Egy kés elég a rabnak, hogy a falát
keresztül ássa, akármilyen vastag is az.

Rögtön hozzáfogott a munkához. A késével kivájta a mészragaszt egy kő
körűl. Csak az első kőnél ment az nehezecskén; de mihelyt az ki lett a
helyéből mozdítva, a munka mindjárt könnyebben ment. Ha napszámba
dolgozott volna, bizoy megkeresett volna a kőmüves pallérnál három
dénárt egy nap alatt. Soha sem szolgálta még meg ilyen jól a kenyerét.
De volt is láttatja. Másod nap már akkora rést vájt a falban, hogy maga
is belefért; s nagy vigasztalására szolgált, hogy a hátralevő falon
keresztül már a külvilági neszből meghallott annyit, hogy a toronyőrök
trombitálnak. Hej ha ő neki egy trombitája volna: most ő is jelt adhatna
innen a föld alúl, s azt a hívei majd meghallanák.

Idelenn a föld alatt csak az órájáról tudta meg, hogy mennyire haladt az
idő; s hogy éjfél van és nem dél. A harmadik nap éjszakája. Alig
fordított belőle valamit álomra. Egyszer azután olyan akadályra talált,
a min az egész tudománya kudarczot vallott. Azt a rést, a mit ő a falon
keresztül tört, mikor már egy ölnyire haladt, egyszerre csak elzárta egy
olyan nagy kőkoloncz, a minek széleire sehol sem akadt rá; de a mit
onnan elmozdítani nem is volna elég egy ember, még ha maga Sámson volna
is.

Hogy vágja magát ezen a nagy kövön keresztül?

A kétségbeesés kezdte környékezni; szakadt a testéről a nehéz veríték.

«Hát nincs Isten a föld alatt!» zúgolódik nagy keserűségében.

Dehogy nincs! Csakhogy nem Isten hírével kerültünk ám ide!

No de jól van: alig hogy e szót kimondta Apor István uram, mit hallanak
fülei? Csákányütéseket kívül a falon. Épen ottan, a hol ő az alagútját
elzáró nagy követ találta. Ez aztán a gyors igazságszolgáltatás! Az ő
hívei kivülről ássák a falat. Tulajdonképen nincs is benne valami
különös csoda. Kár is volna érte letérdepelni és hálákat adni
áhitatosan, mert hisz az egész természetes következése az eseményeknek.
A hű darabontok és a hűséges székelyek, nem találván reggel az ő
főkapitányukat, a ki eltünt, sem Czirjéket, a ki Mundukát keresni
szökött, elindultak a jó uruknak a keresésére: tudván, hogy itt kell
neki valahol eldugva lenni a vár bástyáiban. Most azután, az éj
csendességében, meghallották a neszt, hogy kaparja ő belülről a börtöne
falát, s nosza csákányt, vasrudat ragadtak, hogy ők meg kivülről bontsák
a köveket, a mik a fogolynak útjában állanak!

Dehogy jutott neki eszébe az imádság, meg a félmázsás viaszgyertya, a
mit kínszenvedésében a Boldogságos Szűznek felajánlott. «No megállj
Czirjék! Megállj Damokosné! Ezért véres boszút állok!» Még az is eszébe
jutott, hogy Dimbora Lupujhoz is el lehetne még futtatni s eszére adni a
veszedelmet.

Egyszer aztán nagyot roppant a fal, a nehéz alapkő kigördül; a csillagos
ég derengése bevilágít a földalatti oduba.

– Itt vagyok fiaim! Itt a főkapitánytok, Apor István! kiált a
megmenekült fogoly, kibújva a törött résen szabadítói elé.

De azok ugyancsak furcsán köszöntötték. Egyik az üstökébe markolt, a
másik a gallérjába, a harmadik-negyedik a két kezét kapta el, az ötödik
a száját tömte be, s mielőtt egyet kiálthatott volna, hozzá kötötték a
nyakánál fogva egy lónak a farkához, elkezdtek vele vágtatni, neki aztán
szaladni kellett tüskön-bozóton keresztül, ha azt nem akarta, hogy a
pányva a nyakára szoruljon.

No ez szép kis megszabadulás volt!

A minek pedig az a magyarázata, hogy nem Apor István uram darabontjai
voltak azok, a kik a bástyát kikezdték; hanem a krimiai tatárok,
Buzdurgán emberei.

A haragos murza, a mit megigért, sietett megtenni. A maga csapatjával
legelébb betört Erdélybe, az ojtozi szoroson keresztül, mit senki sem
védelmezett; éjszakára ott termett Mikó-Ujvár alatt. Fogadása tartotta
körmére keríteni Damokos Tamásnét, a ki az uráért sajnálta megküldeni a
váltságdíjat. Nagyon számított rá, hogy még a szeretőjét is ott fogja a
várban találni, a kiért az urát ott hagyta veszendőben. Nem volt ott
most Czirjék Boldizsár, a ki a faágyuival egész tatár-sereget pocsékká
vert ugyanazon a helyen: székely és szász a fülére fekve aludt a várban.
Sem kapitány, sem hadnagy nem volt, a ki az őröket fegyelemben tartsa.
Könnyű volt őket meglepni gondtalan álmukban.

A tatárok észrevétlenül kiásták a bástyafalat, azután ugyanazon a
sülyesztőn keresztül, melybe Apor István lezuhant, felmászának szépen s
a várszobában alvó darabontokat irgalmatlanul megkötözték. Az alsó
boltozatban alvó székelyek csak erre a lármára ébredének fel. Akkor
látták, hogy benn van az ellenség a várban. Ők aztán, nehogy kívül és
belül két tűz közé szoruljanak, senki sem lévén, a ki vezette volna
őket, felnyiták a kaput és fegyveres kézzel kirohanván, elverték maguk
elől, a kit utjokban találtak s aztán elmenekültek a hegyek közé. A
kapitány ám lássa, mitévő legyen?

Azt ugyan attól nem kérdezték, hanem addig nyargaltak vele, a míg a
murza elé nem érkezének.

«Itt hozzuk az Apor Istvánt!»

Hejh! mekkora kaczagásra nyitotta fel az állkapczáját ennél a névnél
Buzdurgán murza.

– Hehej! Hát te vagy az a híres? «Kedves egyetlen Pistukám!» A szép
asszony szerelmes bálványa? A kiért az urát, Damokos Tamást ott hagyja a
csávában! Te rád fáj a fogam. Csakhogy megkaptalak! No ne félj,
elviszlek oda társad mellé: legyetek együtt ketten. Akkor aztán
válogasson majd a szép asszony bennetek, hogy melyitek szebb legény a
talpán? Szerettél a közös tálból enni? No majd lefetyölöd a közös
moslékot, a közös vályuból, Damokos Tamással, s egy korbács csókolja
mind a kettőtök hátát.

Most tudta hát már meg Apor István, hogy bizonyára van Isten a föld
alatt is; csakhogy nem jó a haragját fölébreszteni imádkozással az olyan
embernek, a ki valami rosszban töri a fejét; mert így jár, a hogy ő
járt.

Ellenben Buzdurgán murza még egyszer olyan dühös lett Apor Istvánra,
mikor a kurtányok, a kik a várból visszatértek, hirül hozták neki, hogy
a keresett szép asszonyt nem találták sehol. Vannak ottan fehér népek
többen, de azok mind vének és ránczos képüek. Hogy az asszonyuk hová
lett? azt senki sem tudja.

– Akkor csak te tudod magad, Apor István, dörmögé Buzdurgán. Ha nekem
elő nem adod, ha ki nem vallod, hová dugtad el? bizony mondom neked,
hogy olyan dolgot hallasz, a milyent még soha sem hallottál. A talpadnak
mondják, s mégis a fejed érti meg.

Azt pedig, hogy hol van most Damokos Tamásné, nehéz lett volna akárkinek
is megmondani. Mert azoknak a hegyeknek, a miken keresztül Nogáli uram
lovas szolgálói vezették ez órában Ilka asszonyt, még neveik sincsenek.




ASSZONYOK VERSENYE.

Csak úgy magában járdogálta végig pompás kertje tekervényes útjait a
kadina. Nem telt öröme se a bajadérek tánczában, se az almék dalaiban.
Virágnyilás nem vidítá fel, gyümölcsérés nem vigasztalá meg: körüle
paradicsom volt, de belül volt a sivatag. A kiket maga körül lát, azok
rá nézve nem emberek: asszonyok és eunuchok, engedelmes szolgalelkek.
Üres neki ez a világ.

Az őrt álló cseléd jön feléje sietve, s arczczal a földre borulva,
jelenti alázatosan, hogy odakinn az udvarban egy gyászruhás asszonyság
könyörög bebocsáttatásért, a nevét felirta erre a teszkerára.

Kalme arczán valami villámlott át, a mint ezt a nevet elolvasta:
«Damokos Tamásné!» Megköté magát kevély indulattal s azt felelte:

– Mondjad neki: «jöjjön holnap!»

Miért utalta másnapra? Éreztetni akarta tán vele dölyfös hatalmát? Ebben
is lehet valami. De más oka is lehetett. Ma nem hitte magát elég
szépnek. Törődött volt. Pedig olyan nagyon kivánta, hogy valaha az
életben ezzel az asszonynyal összetalálkozzék, hogy aztán hadd lássák,
melyik volt a szebbik? ő-e, vagy a másik, a kiért őt megvetették,
cserébe el nem fogadták?

Meg akarta ezt az asszonyt verni női szépségével. Az egész nap
előkészülődésekkel telt el. Háromféle fürdőt is vett, legelőször késő
este szamártejből, azután reggel korán damaskusi rózsavizből, utoljára
délben a bűbájos szűzleánytejből, a mit ambrával és pálmaborral
készítenek az arab bűvészek, így árulják ólommal beforrasztott
üvegekben. – Akkor befonatta a haját az asszonyaival gyöngyfüzérek közé;
előhozatta legragyogóbb selyemruháit, kösöntyüit, karpereczeit,
macskaszem, karbunkulus, rubint ragyogott a nyakán, füleiben. Az arczát
kifestette szafflórral, violagyökérrel hajnalszin pirosra; minden száj
azt mondta, de még a tükre is azt vallotta, hogy szebb asszony nem lehet
a földön Kalménál!

Jöhet az a másik!

Inte, hogy vezessék be az udvaron várakozó gyászruhás asszonyt a
hárembe.

Biz az a violaszinű gyászruha nem árulgatja, csak eltakarja a női
szépséget: arany, ezüst, gyémánt sem ragyog a szomorú alakon, egy
makulányi sem, de van azért neki két olyan ékszere, a minővel nem bir a
kadina, s ha az övé volna, bizony csak odaadná érettük cserébe minden
drágaságát, az a két szép poronty, olyan piros arczú, olyan kökény-szemű
mind a kettő. A kisebbik az anyja keblén csügg, két karjával átfonva a
nyakát s szégyenkedve rejti az orczáját az anyja fátyola közé, a mint ez
a sok idegen asszony mind reá néz bámulva. Az anyja suttogva biztatja,
hogy ne féljen semmit; – csak ő vele van elfoglalva, egészen felejti,
hogy a ház úrnőjét köszönteni is kell. És a kadina irigy szemmel látja
vágytársnéja arczán, hogy annak a kis kölyöknek a csókja mennyivel szebb
pirosító minden szafflórnál, violagyökérnél!

S ez a könyörgő asszony még nem is alázza meg magát ő előtte, úgy a hogy
illik, hogy az ajtónál belépve, leborulna mindjárt a földre s aztán, a
hány lépés, annyiszor értetné a homlokát a tarka szőnyeghez, míg az ő
zsámolyához eljut, hanem csak ott alkuszik a nagyobb fiával, a kit kézen
vezet: «térdelj le szépen fiacskám az úrasszony előtt!»

«Biz én nem térdelek; hisz nem a Szűz Mária ez itten!»

No hát ő is akarja vele éreztetni a büszkeségét.

Az őrt álló eunuch sürgetős levelet hoz a kadinának. Kalme asszony ezüst
csiptetővel veszi azt el a vert ezüsttálczáról. Buzdurgán murzának szólt
a levél, kívül ráírva: Foglyok dolgában. Akmet bégtől. Sürgetős.

A murza kedvencz nejét bizta meg azzal, hogy távollétében az érkező
leveleit felbontsa s a mi sürgős elintézni való, azt az ő személyét
képviselve, elvégezze. (Ez már egy kis európai erkölcs volt nála.)

Kalme felbontá a levelet s a míg elolvasta, addig hagyta maga előtt
állni a gyászruhás asszonyt, két kis porontyával.

Ez volt a levélben:

«A Damokos Tamás nevű rab magyar urat, volt székely főkapitányt, a mint
ezen levelemet veszed, szultán ő felsége parancsolatjából (ki ura minden
igazhivőknek és így neked is) fejed vesztésének büntetése alatt azonnal
bocsásd haza. A kétezer arany váltságdíjról adjon neked írást, s azt
majd innenhazulról neked megfizesse, mikor neki lészen. Hogy mikor
lészen? azt ő tudja lészen. A mit is pedig neked az ő feleségéről irék,
hogy más lator férfival, az Apor István urammal eő kegyelmével boronálta
volna össze a fátyolát, az csupa csalafintaság volt. Az asszony sőt
inkább nagyon is hűséges az ő rab urához; még az Rákóczy György
fejedelmet is megkergette ő miatta. A kétezer arany váltságdijat is
megküldte rendén az napjára az uráért, hanem a furfangos Apor István
elfogatta azt útközben a Munduka Ravasel harámbasával, azért, hogy az
Damokos Tamást rabságba veszítse, s így az asszonyát könnyebben
elkaparinthassa, a kiben fülig szerelmes. Tehát az asszonyról többé
semmi rosszat ne mondj. Az Damokos Tamást pedig rögtön hazaküldjed,
különben elhivattatol Sztambulba, a Tsiragány palotába, a hová tudod,
hogy egy kapun megy be az ember, de két kapun jön ki: a feje az egyiken,
a teste a másikon.»

Mikor ezt a levelet végigolvasta a kadina, úgy aláhanyatlott a feje és
két karja, mintha halálos betegség lepte volna meg egyszerre. A mint
véletlenül, tétova szemével maga körül nézett, belepillantott a nagy
velenczei tükrébe s elijedt magától! Halálsárgára volt sápadva az egész
arcza, a mely sápadáson úgy elütött a szafflórral festett kendőzésnek
pirja, mint a hogy a bealkonyult ég sárga szinétől elválik egy elszakadt
rózsapiros felhő.

Se gyöngyök, se gyémántok nem adják vissza az arczának azt a ragyogást,
a mi arról eltünt. A két asszony közül ő volt a gyászolóbb.

– Mit hoztál, jó asszony? kérdezé, Ilkához fordulva.

– Én bizony, kegyelmes asszonyom, elhoztam magammal az én édes, jó
uramnak, Damokos Tamásnak a váltságát, hogy neked átadjam s az uramat
kiváltsam rajta. Kérlek, hogy fogadd el; számláld meg s aztán adasd
nekem által az uramat: nézd, ez a két kis gyerek hogy örül, hogy repes,
hogy mindjárt megláthatják az ő jó apjukat.

Kalme összevonta vékony szemöldeit s hidegnek mutatta magát, erőltetve.

– Jó asszony. Én addig el nem fogadhatom a váltságdijat, a míg az uradra
rá nem találtál. Én a rabokat nem ismerem, azoknak a neveiket sem
hallottam soha. Majd felhozatom őket ide az udvarra, szemeld ki, melyik
az, a kiben ráismersz hajdani férjedre.

– Oh én bizony ráismerek, ha daróczrongyban van is, ha nap elégette is,
fekély meglepte is az ábrázatját, rögtön, ezer közül is egyszerre
kilátom.

– Kivánom, hogy kilásd. De ha nem találnád itt meg, ha nem ismernél rá,
bizony visszaadom az erszény aranyad.

Azzal parancsot adott a kadina az eunuchoknak, hogy hozzák fel az
udvarba mind a kertben dolgozó rabszolgákat, a kiknek még tisztességes
kinézésük vagyon.

Azokat ott sorban felállíták s akkor Damokos Tamásné végig haladt a sor
előtt, arczaikba nézett, búsan fejet csóvált és visszatért a kadinához,
a ki hölgyeivel együtt a kastélynak egy aranyrácsos köröndjéből nézte
ezt a szemlét.

– Az én uram nincsen ezek között.

Ekkor Kalme azt parancsolá, hogy tereljék fel a többi rabokat a
bőrgyárból, a kik ott dolgoznak.

Egyszerre nem fértek el mind az udvarban, csak úgy csapatonkint
hajtották fel őket. Ezek már elzüllött, marczona alakok voltak, naptól
agyonégett, szenvedésektől elkényszerült arczokkal; félig mezítelen,
rongygyal til-túl fedett sovány tagokkal; karjaik, lábszáraik a
bőrcsávától sárgára, feketére, vörösre edzve. Kín ezeket látni, végig
szemlélgetni. Damokos Tamásné sorba járt előttük, végig nézett rajtuk s
csüggedten tért vissza: «egy sem az én uram!»

Egyre nyomorultabb alakok csoportját terelték eléje. A könytől alig
látott már. Azok között sem volt még Damokos Tamás.

Most aztán Kalme parancsot adott, hogy hozzák elő a bőrlúgzóból a
foglyokat. Ezek végzik a legkinzóbb munkát, melyre azokat szokták
kárhoztatni, a kik vagy szökést kisérlettek meg, vagy a váltságdíjukra
hiába várattak. Ezek nem emberi alakok már, hanem kisértetek!

Ilkának a szive úgy elszorult, mintha hegy feküdnék rajta, mikor ez
ijesztő alakok eléje lépdeltek, arczuk elcsúfitva, megcsonkítva, Isten
képe kitörölve róla. Óh mily szívfájdalom őket igyen látni, egy kedves
alakot közöttök keresni!

De mégis megtalálja!

Arczát szétmarczangolhatták, de azt a büszke fejhordozást el nem
vehették tőle. A szennytől fekete, a rongytól undok alakban ráismer az ő
kedvesére, s oda rohan hozzá, öleli karjával, elhalmozza forró
csókjaival s mondja édes szóval ennek az elundokított arcznak: «én
angyalom! én szivem bálványa!»

Kalme nem állhatta ki ezt a jelenetet, kirohant a körönd ajtaján; nem
törődött vele, hogy férfi szem látja fátyoltalan arczát, odarohant az
ölelkezőkhöz.

– Menjetek előlem! Takarodjatok innen! Ne öleljétek itt egymást, ha én
látlak! Itt a pénzed, asszony! Vedd vissza a váltságdíjad!

Azzal oda veté az erszényt a lábaihoz Ilkának.

– Nem akarnád őt kiadni? kérdé megrettenve Ilka.

– De kiadom ingyen!

Damokos Tamás még most is büszke volt! Rongyos, szurtos és ijesztő! De
még mindig kevély.

– Vedd fel azt az erszényt, mondá a nejének s add vissza az
urasszonynak. Ennyit kértek értem: ennyit adnak értem.

– És én még sem veszem vissza, mondá Kalme; s most már ő is versenyre
szólítá a maga büszkeségét. Most vettem Akmet bégnek a levelét, a mely
mást parancsol; hallgasd meg, nem fogod megbánni.

(Mint azt a másik levélolvasást, gondolá magában.)

Mikor azt elolvasta Kalme, az eltorzított arcznak is volt ragyogása.

– Lásd, mondá a levél elolvasásánál, Kalme: a feleséged ilyen hűséges
volt hozzád.

– Tudtam én azt mindig! kiáltá Damokos Tamás, keblére szorítva édes
egyetlenét.

– No hát vedd vissza a pénzed!

– Még sem veszem vissza, mondá Tamás. Hanem ha kegyelemosztó napod van,
fogadd el hát ezt a váltságdijat nem értem, hanem kétszáz
fogolytársamért, kik velem együtt jutottak rabságba. Add ki őket, hadd
jöjjenek ők is velem.

– Jól van. Vidd őket magaddal. De ha a rabokat nem adhatom ingyen,
szabad nekik adnom egyéb útravalót. Gyalog hosszú az út, ott künn a
ménesem. Válaszsz ki belőlük annyi paripát, a hányan vagytok, magyar
rabok. S aztán nehogy a moldvai oláhok, kozákok fegyverteleneket
megcsufoljanak, itt van a fegyvertár, vigyetek belőle magatokkal kardot,
lándzsát, a mennyit elbirtok. De meg az sem illenék, hogy útközben
fosztogatásokból tartsátok magatokat: utiköltségnek vegyétek el tőlem
ezt az erszény aranyat.

S ezzel a sokat utazott kétezer arany megint csak visszavándorolt a
Damokos Tamás kezébe.

Még utoljára majd a Kalme marad győztes az asszony versenyben.

Most már Ilka asszony könyező szemekkel fordula hozzája.

– Óh úrasszonyom! Mivel háláljam én meg ennyi jóságodat? Mit adhatok én
teneked ezért?

Kalme szemei úgy égtek, ragyogtak.

– Add ide egy pillanatra azt a kis kölyket a karodról, hadd csókoljam
össze.

Ilka odanyujtá két kezével a kis szégyenkedő pirospofájú angyalkát.
Kalme odaragadta azt a keblére mind a két karjával, s elhalmozta arczát,
szemeit, homlokát forró csókjaival: a köny, mint a zápor, úgy szakadt
szeméből, egy hosszú pillanatig olyan boldognak álmodta magát, mint az a
másik asszony.

Akkor visszadobta a gyermeket hevesen az anyja keblére.

– Fogjad! vigyed! S most már szaladj előlem a kincseiddel: a míg
jókedvemben találsz, a míg föl nem ébredek haragos kedvemre, mert akkor,
nem tudod, hogy nem öllek-e agyon, s elveszem tőled az uradat és a
gyermekedet!

De úgy megijedt ettől a fenyegetéstől Ilka asszony, hogy egy pillanatig
sem maradt ott állva, hanem a két kezével megkapta egyfelől az urának,
másfelől a nagyobbik fiának a kezét, a kisebbiket a nyakába ültette
lovazva s úgy futott ki velök a nyitott várkapun, mint a ki lopott
kincset visz magával.

Csak azután, hogy a kapun kívül voltak, s látta, hogy senki sem kergeti,
tért magához, s azt kérdé az urától:

– De vajjon Buzdurgán murza, ha hazakerül, helyeselni fogja-e azt, hogy
a felesége ennyi rabot elbocsátott s még lovat, fegyvert is adott nekik?

– De bizony nem fogja.

– Talán meg is haragszik érte a feleségére?

– De nagyon megharagszik.

– Mit fog vele tenni? uram Jézus!

– Bőrzsákba varratja s beledobatja a nagy vizesésbe.

– Hogy az úr Isten pusztítsa el őtet, mielőtt hazaérkezne!

– Magam is azt kivánom neki!

(Talán nem is tette volna azt hozzá Damokos Tamás, ha előre tudta volna,
hogy az úr Isten meghallgatja ugyan azt a kegyes óhajtást, hanem épen ő
rá fogja bízni annak a végrehajtását.)




A DAMOKOS-VÁGÁS.

Siralmas dolog volna azt leirni, a mik ez alatt Erdélyben történtek.

A felgerjedt török szultán ráereszté a maga hadait minden oldalról a
szerencsétlen országra, mely azt sem tudta már, hogy kinek
engedelmeskedjék? annyi volt a fejedelme.

A krimiai tatárok hordája végigpusztítá az egész fejedelemséget mind a
Királyhágóig, de még ott sem állt meg, hanem átcsapott Magyarországra,
olyan rémületet támasztva maga előtt, hogy senki sem mert neki
ellentállni, csak futott előle minden nép, a hol az előcsapatja
megjelent s engedte a városait fölégetni. Ekkor pusztították el
Gyula-Fehérvárt is, a szép kollégium könyvtárát halomra rakták, úgy
gyujtották meg. S csak akkor hagyták oda az országot, mikor már úgy
megterhelték magukat zsákmánynyal, hogy többet nem birt el a ló, meg a
rabszolgahad.

A Rákóczy György jenői diadalának ez volt a szomorú következése.

Buzdurgán murza is megelégelte már az olcsó diadalokat, jóllakhatott
vérrel és jajkiáltásokkal, egész csordaszámra hajtá maga előtt a
rabszíjra fűzött férfit, asszonyt, marhát, birkát – vegyest.

Ekkor került haza Damokos Tamás, a maga kiszabadult kétszáz vitéz
bajtársával.

Mikor az ojtozi szoroshoz ért, a hol II. Rákóczy György által épített
vár zárja el a völgy kijáratát, hát akkor ő még azt hitte, hogy ez a vár
a székelyek kezében van, semmit sem tudott arról, hogy milyen furfanggal
foglalták el azt a törökök. A hazaszabadult székelyek pedig mindnyájan
tatár-öltözetet viseltek; mert bizony Krimiában senki se varrt az ő
számukra székely zekét, harisnyát; a fegyverzetük is egészen tatárokéhoz
hasonlított. Annálfogva azt mondá Boldizsár bának Damokos Tamás:

– Eredj csak, édes bátyám, előre be a várba. Neked magyar gúnyád van,
beeresztenek, s világosítsad fel a bennlevőket, hogy mi nem vagyunk
tatárok, különben még közénk ágyuznak, puskáznak; elnéznek bennünket.

– De nem megyek biz én; mondá Boldizsár bá. Mert ha én bemegyek a magyar
ruhámmal a Rákóczy-várba, soha ki nem jövök onnan többet. Török van
odabenn. Inkább adj nekem is egy tatársüveget, meg egy hosszú dárdát,
aztán hadd lovagolok előre valami huszadmagammal a várba. Ilyen kevés
népet bizton beeresztenek. Ha egyszer aztán ott leszek a felvonó hidon,
ti többiek az erdőben rohanjatok utánam, egy hajtással elkapjuk ezt a
várat.

A bizony sikerült az ezermesternek. Lomha oláh őrséget hagyott a török a
Rákóczy-várban, nem is gondolt rá, hogy azt hátulról, Moldvából
fenyegethesse valami veszedelem. Egy kardcsapás nélkül el lett az
foglalva. Az őrséget kilökték, menjen haza az anyja örömébe!

A mint annak hire futamodott, hogy hazakerült a Damokos Tamás meg a
lúfők hada Krimiából, hogy be is vették a Rákóczy várát, egyszerre nagy
lett a csődület az ojtozi hegyekben. Csikből, Háromszékből a hegyek közt
lappangó székelység mind odasietett. Volt ember is, fegyver is elég;
csak a vezető hiányzott.

Mikor Tamás megtudta, hogy Mikóujvárát is elvette a tatár, nagyon szidta
érte a csiki székelyeket; minek engedték magukat olyan könnyen kizavarni
a várukból? Azok azt felelték rá, hogy «mikor nem volt lovasságunk:»
Aztán beszélj velük, ha tudsz!

– No hát már most van lovasságtok. Hát gyertek velem, foglaljuk vissza.

– Megyünk is!

S meg is indulának Damokos és Czirjék vezetése alatt egész seregestül a
száguldó tatárra.

Ott találkozának Buzdurgán murzával a csikszeredai sikon. Az jött Ojtoz
felé a nagy prédájával s szörnyen elbámult rajta, mikor dárdaerdőt
látott maga előtt; a miről azt hitte, hogy a gyökerét is kitépte már a
földből.

Hát már ez a székely, akárhányszor agyonverik, mindig újra feltámad!

Bizony fel az!

A tatárnak pedig az volt a szokása, hogy a hol váratlan ellenállásra
talált, ott mindjárt lekonyult a taréja.

Buzdurgán murza dühös volt, hogy így elállják az útját.

Kilovagolt maga a két sereg közötti sikság közepére s kirántva hatalmas
pallosát, elkezdett kiabálni, olyan szörnyű hangon, hogy
félmértföldnyire is meg lehetett hallani.

«Ti hitetlen kutyák! Majd elbujtok egérlyukaitokba, ürgének születtek!
Ha van közöttetek embernek való ember, küldjétek ide elém; csapjunk
össze egy szál karddal! No hát van-e ember a székelyek közt!»

Ember volt biz elég, de óriás nem volt. Azok rég kihaltak már a nagy
Czohárdról, a hol legutoljára laktak. Ki mérkőznék össze egy ilyen nagy
bolond hustoronynyal, a kinek a pallosát más Isten teremtése két kézzel
sem tudja megemelni.

Pedig hát nagy szégyen lesz, ha a kérkedő góliáthtal nem tudnak senkit
szembeállítani.

Egyik a másikra nézett; de csak egyiknek sem akaródzott a kardját
összepróbálni a murzáéval. Hosszabb az valamennyiénél.

– Hej édes jó öcsém, vitéz Damokos Tamás kapitány uram. Csak neked kell
ezzel a csodával összeakaszkodnod! Mondá Czirjék Boldizsár a
főkapitánynak.

A többi hadnagyok is mind neki esének: «te vívhatsz meg vele, senki
más.»

Damokos Tamás látta, hogy ezt a harczot nem kerülheti ki.

És akkor erre az emlékezetes mondásra fakadt, a mi fel van jegyezve a
Damokos-család hagyományaiban.

«Héj becsület, becsület! Ha te nem volnál, nem kellene én nekem most
meghalnom!»

S mondván, kirántá a kardját, eláldotta ennek a világnak keserüségét
nagy búbánatában, «aztán köszöntsétek a feleségemet, meg a két kis
árvámat!» És most «segíts uram Jézus!» azzal a lovát megsarkantyuzva,
kiugratott a homloksorból a síkság közepére, Bozdurgán murzával
szembeiramodvást.

Amint a murza meglátta a feléje vágtatót, megismerte az elcsufolt
orczájáról a kiszabadult rabját s rárivalt csufondárosan:

– Hát te hogy szöktél meg a csávagödörből, Tamás a Damokosok között? Tán
biz a feleségem bocsátott szabadon? Te világcsaló hazug! Nojszen. Voltam
a gyulafehérvári nagy medreszben: kerestem a huszonnyolcz övet, a kiről
te mčhdruli ábéczét tanultál; egyet sem találtam; no majd oda haza
esztrengára veszem a kadinát, hogy mint jutottál az ő öveihez? Most
pedig csak gyere ide a kezem ügyébe, hadd hasítlak kettőbe. Az egyik
feledet a magad feleségének, a másikat az enyémnek! Ha olyan nagyon
szerettek, osztozzanak rajtad.

Azzal felemelte faágvastagságú karjával magasra azt a széles pallost, a
mi egy bikát is képes kettészelni s csak úgy forgatta a feje fölött,
mintha nádszál volna. Úgy várta be a reárohanó Damokos Tamást.

Hanem hát meglehet, hogy az ilyen nagy testnél nem olyan nagyon gyors az
agy és a kar közötti összeműködés, mint a kisebb termetűnél, a míg az ő
feje azt mondja a kezének: «vágj», míg az ezt megteszi, az alatt a
tömzsi régen odavágott: Damokos Tamásnak az éles szablyája csak egy
villámlásnyi kis idővel elébb csapott le hamarább a Buzdurgán nyakára,
mielőtt annak a palosa ő reá alázúdult volna, de olyan szerencsétlenül
talált neki oda, hogy a hordónyi nagy fő csak lerepült az óriás válla
közül s a mint talpra esék a földön, nagy mordiásan összehuzta a
szemöldökeit, fintorgatta az orrát s nagyokat pillogatott meredező
szemeivel, a szája tátogott hozzá, mintha szemrehányásokat tenne: «Ej
Damokos Tamás, ezt nem vártam tőled!»

A fejnélküli test pedig, megfordulván a lovával, elkezdett szaladni
vissza a tatár tábor felé, szokása szerint a két földig érő lábával is
segítve nyargalni az alatta futó lónak. Az öklébe szorított pallos egyre
csapkodott a levegőbe jobbra-balra, mint a bomlott szélmalomszárny. A
tatárság erre a látványra úgy megijedt, hogy hátat fordított, elfutott
világgá, ott hagyva a székelyeknek az egész prédáját s pányvára fűzött
rabjait valamennyit.

Azok között megtalálta Damokos Tamás Apor István uramat is. De nem tett
neki semmi szemrehányást, csak azt tanácsolá, hogy máskor legyen
Istennel s ne kivánja a felebarátja romlását.

Ekkor aztán a várát is visszafoglalta Tamás, de az olyan rongált
állapotban volt, hogy meg nem maradhatott benne, hanem elvitte családját
Alsó-Csernátonba, az ősi lakházába. Most is ottan laknak az ivadékai.
Mind olyan derék emberek, mint ő volt, meg a felesége.

*

Nem sokára a török szultán kihozá tatár rabságból az egész fogoly
magyarságot, vezérükkel, Kemény Jánossal egyetemben, a kit egyúttal
megtett Erdély fejedelmének.

És így beteljesült az égi jóslat a négy vak nappal, hogy Erdélynek négy
fejedelme fog lenni egyszerre.

Két év mulva mind a négy elmult: három csatákban esett el.

Szegény Erdély, de sokat szenvedett!

De fennmaradt a családi hagyományok között, a székely nép ajkain,
Damokos Tamásnak az a jellemző mondása: «hej becsület! becsület! ha te
nem volnál, nem kellene én nekem most meghalnom!»

És aztán az olyan vágást, a milyennel Tamás Buzdurgán murzát elbocsátá a
világról, máig is úgy hivják, hogy «Damokos-vágás».

Adjon Isten mindenkinek belőle, a ki megérdemli!




Lábjegyzetek.

[Footnote 1: Az akkoriban dívó néphit szerint a legfélelmesebb réme volt
a csik-szeredai völgynek a «Simó Péter», egy nagy fekete óriás, a ki az
éjjeli utazók szekereire felült, s gazdáikat birkózni hivta az
ólomszérüre.]

[Footnote 2: Hát ezt ki tudja, hogy mi?]

[Footnote 3: Igazolja ezt a krimiai rab uraknak egy levele 1658. május
elejéről, melyet Rákóczy Györgyhöz irtak, elpanaszolván, hogy két
társukat erős eskü mellett elbocsáták az uraik, hogy hazamenvén
Erdélybe, mind magukért, mind rabul maradt társaikért a váltságdíjat
meghozzák. De azok hitszegően elmaradtak. «Immár pediglen a terminus
elmulván, minket szegény megnyomorodott rabokat érettek rontnak, vernek,
kinoznak és keservesen csigázván, orr-, fülmetéléssel, fogkivonással,
szemeink kivájatásával fenyegetnek, ha vissza nem jönnek: kiért az Ur
Isten erős haragját rájuk bocsátani fogja (a szökevényekre). Mert
mikoron kibocsátották volt őket, erős hittel igen esküdtenek, hogy az
élő Isten őket, ha kötéseknek nem állanak, semminemű dolgaikban meg ne
segítse, sőt Istennek minden áldása fejeiken átok legyen és a
gyermekeiket is az átok és Istennek rettenetes haragja, mint az ég a
földet, úgy borítsa be: sőt ha meghalnának is, az testeket az földnek
gyomra kiokádja és lelkek itéletnapig se mennyországban, se pokolban ne
mehessen! Mégis az napjára be nem jövének az hamishitű istentelen,
minket nyomorgattató és örökkévaló rabságba borító emberek…»


Ezen levélben Damokos is fel van említve a sanyargatott rabok között:
tévedésből Péter keresztnévvel, de a családi okmányok és Kemény János
fejedelem levele, melyet Tamás is aláirt, ez utóbbit igazolják.


L. Történeti tár 1882., IV. füzet, 614. l.]





TARTALOM.

  A csernátoni ezermester  1
  A Csetátye Drakuluj  9
  A Mikó-Ujvári ágyuk  17
  Benn az ellenség a várban  28
  Buzdurgán  32
  Kalme  42
  Hogy hozzák tánczba a törököt?  68
  Munduka Ravasel  78
  A csodatevő kigyókő  92
  A négyezer özvegyasszony ostroma  100
  A szerelem boszuja  133
  Az egérfogó  156
  A dráku popi  169
  Van Isten a föld alatt is!  177
  Asszonyok versenye  182
  A Damokos-vágás  189


[Transcriber's Note:


Javítások.

Az eredeti szöveg helyesírásán nem változtattunk.

A nyomdai hibákat javítottuk. Ezek listája:


13 |vísszajönnek, fölülről |visszajönnek, fölülről

40 |Utik verik? |Ütik verik?

48 |Orülök, ha kivált |Örülök, ha kivált

78 |Tomasius Damokos de Newtood.» |«Tomasius Damokos de Newtood.»

80 |kecske a káposztával! |kecske a káposztával!»

146 |egy csomóban. |egy csomóban.»

152 |purgatoriumnál. |purgatoriumnál.»

183 |ez itten! |ez itten!»

186 |szivem bálványa! |szivem bálványa!»

187 |ki ltá Damokos |kiáltá Damokos

195 |A csernátoni ezermester 2 |A csernátoni ezermester 1]







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Damokosok, by Mór Jókai

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAMOKOSOK ***

***** This file should be named 55934-0.txt or 55934-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/9/3/55934/

Produced by Albert László from page images generously made
available by the Google Books Library Project


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.Project Gutenberg's Section-Cutting: A Practical Guide, by Sylvester Marsh

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Section-Cutting: A Practical Guide
       To the preparation and mounting of sections for the microscope, etc.

Author: Sylvester Marsh

Release Date: November 10, 2017 [EBook #55930]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECTION-CUTTING: A PRACTICAL GUIDE ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Barry Abrahamsen, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                            SECTION-CUTTING:

                           A PRACTICAL GUIDE

                                 TO THE

                PREPARATION AND MOUNTING OF SECTIONS FOR
                            THE MICROSCOPE,

                 _SPECIAL PROMINENCE BEING GIVEN TO THE
                      SUBJECT OF ANIMAL SECTIONS._



                                   BY


                          DR. SYLVESTER MARSH.


                         _WITH ILLUSTRATIONS._


     REPRINTED FROM THE LONDON EDITION, WITH NOTES AND AN APPENDIX
              ON THE SELECTION AND CARE OF SECTION KNIVES.



                               NEW YORK:
                    INDUSTRIAL PUBLICATION COMPANY.
                                 1879.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE.

If we glance at any of the numerous magazines devoted either wholly or
in part to the subject of microscopy, we shall hardly fail to be struck
with the numerous queries relating to SECTION-CUTTING, which are to be
found in its pages. A simple explanation of this wide-spread want is
afforded by the fact that the use of the microscope has at the present
day extended to (and is still rapidly spreading amongst) vast numbers of
students, who, in many instances, possess neither the leisure nor the
means to refer for information to large and expensive text-books.
Moreover, were they actually to consult such works, they would
practically fail to obtain the information of which they are in need,
for the coveted instruction is to be found in those treatises only in a
scattered and fragmentary form—no work with which we are acquainted
treating of the subject in anything like a detailed manner. To fill this
_vacuum_ in the literature of microscopy the present manualette has been
prepared. Little claim is made to originality, yet the book is by no
means a mere compilation, but the outcome of long and extensive personal
experience in the cutting and mounting of microscopical sections. Every
process described has been put to the test of actual trial, so that its
worth may confidently be depended upon. Many of the little points
insisted upon in the ensuing pages will doubtless to the practised
microscopist appear superfluous or even puerile; but a vivid
recollection of our own early failures and disappointments assures us
that it is just these very _minutiæ_ of detail which will be found most
serviceable in directing and sustaining the faltering footsteps of the
tyro.

    ST. HELENS, _September, 1878_.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                      PREFACE TO AMERICAN EDITION.

                             --------------


Dr. Marsh’s book cannot fail to promote the practical study of histology
wherever the English language is spoken, and under ordinary
circumstances the students of this country might have been left to the
use of the London edition. But a careful reading showed that one or two
points which are perfectly clear to British readers might be a source of
doubt and difficulty to students on this side. At the present day in
this country histology is a favorite study with very many private
students who have no access to teachers or large libraries, and for the
purpose of smoothing their path we have added such information as was
obviously desirable. In the hope that these additions will prove of
value, we submit the book to American readers.

    NEW YORK, _January, 1879_.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CONTENTS.

                                -------


                                PART I.


       Introduction                                           11
       On Cutting Unprepared Vegetable Tissues                12
       On Cutting Unprepared Animal Tissues                   13
       Preparation of Vegetable Tissues                       15
       Preparation of Animal Tissues                          16
       Special Methods of Hardening                           19
       Cutting Hardened Tissues by Hand                       19
       Microtome                                              20
       Æther Microtome                                        24
       Section-Knife                                          24
       Imbedding in Paraffine for Microtome                   26
       Employment of Microtome                                29
       Staining Agents                                        31
       Carmine Staining                                       32
       Mounting Media                                         36
       Mounting in Glycerine                                  38
       Uses of Freezing Microtome                             42
       Employment of Freezing Microtome                       43
       Logwood Staining                                       47
       Absolute Alcohol                                       50
       Clove Oil                                              51
       Canada Balsam                                          51
       Mounting in Balsam                                     53
       Finishing the Slide                                    55


                                PART II.

       Special Methods                                        57
       Bone                                                   57
       Brain                                                  59
       Cartilage                                              60
       Coffee Berry                                           62
       Fat                                                    63
       Hair                                                   63
       Horn, etc.                                             64
       Intestine                                              64
       Liver                                                  65
       Lung                                                   65
       Muscle                                                 66
       Orange-peel                                            67
       Ovary                                                  67
       Porcupine Quill                                        67
       Potato                                                 67
       Rush                                                   68
       Skin                                                   68
       Spinal Cord                                            69
       Sponge                                                 71
       Stomach                                                71
       Tongue                                                 71
       Vegetable Ivory                                        72
       Wood                                                   72
       Note A,                                                75
       Note B,                                                75
       Note C,                                                76
       Note D,                                                76
       Note E,                                                76
       Note F,                                                77
       Note G,                                                77
       Note H,                                                93
       Note I,                                                94
       Index




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            SECTION-CUTTING.

                             --------------

                                PART I.

1. _Introduction._—Many of the most interesting objects with which the
microscopist has to deal, cannot be made to reveal their beauty or
minute structure until they have been cut into slices or _sections_, of
such a degree of thinness as to render them transparent, and thus permit
of their examination by transmitted light, with objectives of varying
power. Unfortunately, however, very few of the objects of this class
are, in their natural condition, in a suitable state to be submitted to
this method of procedure. Some are of such a soft and yielding nature
that any attempt to cut them is an utter failure, for in place of a
perfect section being obtained, nothing remains upon the knife but a
mass of diffluent pulp; others, again, are of such density as to resist
the action of any cutting instrument.

It is evident, therefore, that nothing can be done with such refractory
materials until, by subjection to appropriate methods of preparation,
they shall have been reduced to such a consistence as to render them
suitable for cutting. How this is to be accomplished will depend
entirely upon the physical and chemical nature of the substance to be
operated upon. As the various objects differ so widely from each other
in these respects, so must the methods of preparation suitable to each
also vary. It is clear, therefore, that no general directions for
attaining this end can be given which would be of any practical value.
It is possible, however, and very convenient, to arrange the various
objects into groups or classes, to the treatment of each of which
certain general rules are applicable; but there will still remain a
comparatively numerous series of objects whose individual peculiarities
of structure will demand for them correspondingly special methods of
preparation. When such objects come to be spoken of, the particular
treatment most suitable to each will also be noticed.

2. _On Cutting unprepared Vegetable Tissues._—There are some few
substances, however, which may with more or less success be cut into
sections whilst in their natural condition. Such objects are to be found
in the vegetable world in certain kinds of leaves and allied structures,
whilst in the animal kingdom they are principally represented by the
various internal organs of man and the lower animals. Special directions
are given in text-books for the preparation of sections of leaves and
similar substances. For instance, it is recommended to lay the leaf,
etc., on a piece of fine cork, and with a sharp knife to shave off thin
slices, cutting down upon the cork. Another plan is to place the leaf,
etc., between two thin layers of cork, and cut through the mass. No
method, however, is at once so simple and successful as the process of
imbedding in paraffine. To do this, it is necessary to make a paper
mould by twisting a strip of stout writing paper round a ruler, and
turning-in the paper over the end of the ruler. This mould, the height
of which may vary from an inch to an inch and a half, should now be
about half filled with melted paraffine mixture (§ 11), the leaf or
other object plunged into it, and held in position by small forceps till
the paraffine has become sufficiently solidified to yield it a support.
More of the paraffine mixture is now poured in until the specimen is
thoroughly imbedded; the whole is to be put away in a cold place for an
hour or so, when the mass will be found sufficiently firm to be cut with
ease. Sections may be made with a razor kept constantly wetted with
water, or, if the preservation of colour be no object, methylated spirit
may be employed for the purpose. As the subsequent treatment of such
sections in no wise differs from that required by those cut in the
microtome, we shall defer its consideration until that method of section
has been described (§ 12).

3. _On Cutting unprepared Animal Tissues._—For the cutting of fresh
_animal_ tissues several plans may be followed. Thus, if a section of
only very limited area be required, it may be obtained by snipping a
piece off the tissue with a pair of bent scissors, which, for this
purpose, are so made that the blades are _curved on the flat_
(Carpenter). If this be carefully performed it will be found that a
large portion of the section (particularly at the circumference) so
obtained will be sufficiently thin for examination. If a larger section
be desired, an attempt may be made to cut it with a very sharp scalpel
or razor, the blade of which whilst in use must be kept _flooded_ with
water, or spirit, the latter of which is to be preferred. Recourse may
also be had to _Valentin’s_ knife. This consists of two long, narrow
blades, running parallel to each other, the distance at which the blades
are held apart, and which, of course, determines the thickness of the
section, being regulated by means of a fine screw passing through both
blades. A milled head attached to this screw gives a ready means of
opening or closing the blades, so as to bring them to the desired degree
of approximation. The method of using the knife is very simple. After
having “set” the blades at the desired distance apart by means of the
milled head, the tissue to be cut is held in the left hand immersed in a
basin of water. The knife is now steadily and with a rapid motion
_drawn_ through the tissue, care being taken that the cut is made in
such a manner that the blades move from heel to point. By slightly
separating the blades and gently shaking them in the water, the section
at once becomes disengaged. After use, the blades must be thoroughly
dried, when they may be smeared with some oil which does not readily
oxidize. For this purpose, a very suitable oil is that known as
“Rangoon.”[1] Though it has been deemed advisable briefly to describe
the preceding methods of cutting unhardened tissues, it will be found
that for the purposes of the ordinary microscopical student sections so
obtained are of very little value. They are always of very limited
dimensions, seldom of uniform thickness, and often so extremely friable
as to render it very difficult and frequently impossible to submit them
with safety to such further treatment as is necessary to fit them for
being mounted as permanent objects. This method of section-cutting,
however, is not without its uses, for by its means the medical
practitioner is provided with a simple and ready method of roughly
investigating the structure of morbid tissues, whilst to the general
student it furnishes an easy means of making a cursory examination of
certain substances, in order that he may determine whether it be worth
his while to subject them to some of those various processes of
hardening hereafter to be described.

Footnote 1:

  Note A.

4. _Preparation of Vegetable Tissues._—Let us now pass to a brief
consideration of the methods usually adopted for preparing the various
objects for easy section. In the case of _vegetable_ tissues, not only
do we, as a rule, find their texture of too great density to be readily
cut in their natural condition, but they also contain much resinous and
starchy matter, of which it is highly desirable to get rid. In order to
do this we first cut the substance (say a stem or root) into small
pieces, which are to be placed in water for three or four days, by which
time all the soluble gummy matters will have disappeared. The pieces are
now transferred to a wide-necked bottle, containing methylated
spirit,[2] which, in the course of a few days, will dissolve out all the
resin, etc. Many kinds of woody tissue are by these processes reduced to
a fit condition for immediate cutting; others, however, are so hard as
to render it necessary to give them another soaking for some hours in
water, to bring them to a sufficient degree of softness to cut easily.
If the wood (as in some few refractory cases will happen) be still too
hard for section, a short immersion in warm, or if necessary, in boiling
water, will not fail effectually to soften it. The treatment of such
members of the vegetable division as require peculiar methods, will be
found described in future pages.

Footnote 2:

  Note B.

5. _Preparation of Animal Tissues._—_Animal_ tissues differ from one
another so greatly, both in consistence and in chemical composition, as
well as in their degree of natural hardness, that no general rules can
be given which would be applicable to the preparation of the whole
class. Such as are of any considerable degree of hardness, as horn and
kindred structures, must be treated much in the same manner as the
denser varieties of wood, viz., by more or less prolonged immersion in
water—cold, hot, or boiling. Those which are of extreme hardness, as
bones and teeth, can be cut only by following certain special methods,
full details of which will be found in the Second Part of this work (§
26). Many, and indeed the vast majority of animal tissues, offer a
direct contrast in point of hardness to those we have just been
considering. All the internal organs of the body are, when freshly
removed, of much too soft a nature to permit, when in their unprepared
condition, of easy or perfect cutting. It is upon bringing them to that
critical degree of hardness, which is often so difficult to attain, that
the chief secret of successful section-cutting depends; for unless the
hardening process has been carried up to, but not beyond, a given point,
which varies with different tissues, the operator, however dexterous,
will fail to obtain satisfactory sections. For, if the hardening has
fallen short of this critical point, he is, to some extent, in the same
position as if he were dealing with unhardened tissues; whilst, if this
point has been exceeded, the tissue will have become so brittle as to
crumble before the knife. For the purpose of hardening animal tissues,
the student has at his command two principal agents, namely, alcohol and
chromic acid, each of which possesses advantages of its own, but the use
of each of which is also attended by its own inconveniences. Thus, by
the use of alcohol, there is very much less risk of overhardening the
specimen than if chromic acid had been employed. Alcohol, however,
though a capital indurating agent in some instances, does not answer so
well in many others. Chromic acid is, therefore, to be preferred for
general use. It is, however, a very delicate agent to manage, for unless
the greatest care be taken it is exceedingly likely to overharden
tissues submitted to its action, and when this happens the specimen
becomes utterly useless for cutting, as there is no known means of
removing the extreme brittleness which it has acquired. By taking the
precautions now to be given, this overhardening may generally be
avoided. Let us harden a portion of some viscus, say the kidney, for
instance. Suppose we cut from the organ five or six small pieces (from
half to three-quarters of an inch square, _not larger_). These must be
placed in a mixture of equal parts of methylated spirit and water for
three days, at the end of which period they may be transferred to a
solution of chromic acid, made by dissolving twenty grains of the pure
acid in sixteen ounces of distilled water. The solution should be kept
in a wide-necked bottle furnished with a glass stopper. At the
expiration of seven days, pour off the solution and replace it by fresh.
At the end of another week, carefully examine the immersed tissues, and
by means of a sharp razor see if they have acquired the necessary degree
of hardness to allow of a section of _moderate_ thinness being made. If
so, remove the pieces and put them into a stoppered bottle containing
from six to eight ounces of methylated spirit. If, however, the
hardening be found not to be sufficiently advanced, the chromic acid
solution is to be poured off and again replaced by fresh. It will now be
necessary to examine the tissues at intervals of about two days, until
they are found to be sufficiently hard, when they must be transferred to
the spirit. Under no circumstances, however, should they be permitted to
remain in the chromic acid longer than the end of the third week, and
though they should at this time appear not to have undergone sufficient
induration, yet it will be advisable to transfer them to the methylated
spirit, which in a short time will _safely_ complete the process of
hardening, without any risk being run of the tissue becoming ruinously
brittle. It will be noticed, that when the specimens have been
transferred to spirit, the latter will in a day or two become of a deep
yellow color, whilst a thick flocculent deposit falls to the bottom of
the bottle. The tissues should then be removed, the bottle emptied and
well washed, and, being refilled with clean spirit, the preparations are
again to be replaced. This may occasionally be repeated, until the
spirit becomes and remains perfectly bright and clear. The specimens are
then ready for section.

6. _Special Methods of Hardening._—The brain (§ 27), spinal cord (§ 43),
liver (§ 34), and several other organs, etc., require special methods of
hardening, details of which will be found in the paragraph devoted to
each. In the case of _injected_ preparations, the best plan is to harden
them in alcohol from the outset, beginning with weak spirit, and
gradually increasing the strength as the hardening proceeds. When the
object has been injected with Prussian blue, a few drops of hydrochloric
acid should be added to the alcohol to fix the color.

It may here be observed, that specimens of _morbid tissues_ require, as
a general rule, a shorter immersion in chromic acid solution than
healthy tissues do. A very small degree of overhardening speedily
renders them brittle and useless. They should, therefore, be removed
from the acid medium at the end of ten days or a fortnight, and their
further hardening carried on by means of alcohol.

7. _Cutting Hardened Tissues by Hand._—Our material being now reduced to
a fit condition for cutting, let us proceed to consider the several
methods by which this may be effected. The readiest and most simple
plan, if the piece be large enough, is to hold it in the left hand, and,
having brought the surface to a perfect level by cutting off several
rather thick slices, endeavor to cut a thin section by the aid of a very
sharp razor, the blade of which must be kept well _flooded_ with spirit.
As in the use of _Valentin’s_ knife, so here, great care must be taken
steadily to _draw_ the blade across the tissue, every effort being made
to avoid _pushing_ the knife, else the section will be _torn off_,
instead of being _cut_. Though this method[3] is of very great
importance for many purposes, yet a considerable degree of manipulative
skill is required to enable the operator to obtain anything like perfect
sections by its means, and, unfortunately, this skill is acquired by
very few persons indeed, even after much practice. If the piece which it
is desired to cut be too small to be conveniently held in the hand, it
may be imbedded in paraffine in the manner already described (§ 3). A
very simple imbedding agent, and one of the greatest practical value, is
a strong solution of gum arabic, which, upon being dehydrated either by
ordinary drying or the action of alcohol, soon acquires such a degree of
hardness as to permit it (with the imbedded tissue) to be cut with ease.
As this method of imbedding, however, is most frequently resorted to
where, by its means, special difficulties have to be overcome, a full
description of the process (§ 35) will be deferred until such special
cases come to be spoken of.

Footnote 3:

  Note C.

8. _Microtome._—Although the preceding plans may be sufficient to answer
all his requirements, if the student wishes to obtain only one or two
sections of small dimensions, of a given object, if he requires a number
of such sections he will find these methods fail him, for even though by
practice he may have attained to considerable aptitude in the use of the
knife, it will still unquestionably happen that the vast majority of his
sections will be more or less imperfect. If, therefore, it be desired to
procure a number of perfect sections, of equable thickness and large
area, it is absolutely necessary to resort to the use of some form or
other of microtome, or section-cutter. This instrument, in its simplest
form, merely consists of a stout brass tube closed at one end, and being
by the other fixed at right angles into a smooth plate of metal. A plug
or disk of brass, accurately fitting the interior of the tube, is acted
upon by a fine threaded screw piercing the base of the tube, and by
means of which the plug, and any object it may support, can be elevated
at pleasure. The object by this means being made gradually to rise out
of the tube, sections are cut from it by simply gliding a sharp knife
along the smooth cutting-plate, and hence across the specimen. Any
intelligent worker in brass would make an instrument of this kind at a
very small cost, and although perhaps it might lack the finish of an
instrument bought at the optician’s, it would, if accurately made, do
its work as well as the most complicated and expensive. If, however, the
student resolves to purchase a microtome, there are a variety of forms
in the market from which he may choose. A few hints may perhaps be of
service in enabling him to make a judicious selection. At the outset we
may say that unless the student intends to devote himself solely to the
production of sections of wood, etc., he ought not to procure one of
those forms of microtome known as wood section-cutters, in which the
object to be cut is held in position in the tube by means of a binding
screw which pierces its side.[4] Although these machines are all that
can be desired for cutting hard bodies, they are not so suitable for
soft ones. The chief points to be attended to in selecting a microtome
are, (1) that the cutting-plate of the instrument be made of glass, or
in default of this, of very hard metal of the most perfect
smoothness;[5] (2) that the diameter of the tube be neither too large
nor too small—it ought not to be less than 5/8-in., or greater than 1
inch;[6] (3) that the screw, which should be _fine_ and well cut, be
provided with a graduated head; (4) that there be some kind of index by
which fractional portions of a revolution of the screw may be measured;
and (5) that the plug fit the tube of the microtome so accurately that
when melted paraffine, gum, or other imbedding agent be poured into it,
it may not find its way between the plug and side of the tube (§ 18). It
often happens in cutting tissues imbedded in paraffine, that the
pressure of the knife causes the cylinder of the imbedding agent to
twist round in the tube of the machine, and so cause considerable
difficulty and annoyance. This evil is usually met by running a deep
groove across the upper surface of the plug, and into this the paraffine
sinks, and so is prevented from rotating. It will be found, moreover,
that another difficulty of a kindred, though much more serious
character, will frequently be encountered. During section the paraffine
has a tendency not only to rotate, but also to become loosened from the
subjacent plug, and to _rise_ in the tube of the microtome. When this
happens the power to cut sections of uniform thickness has completely
gone, for some will now be found to be many times thicker than others;
in fact, the irregularity in this respect soon becomes so monstrous as
to render it useless to prolong the sitting. In the ordinary run of
microtomes no provision seems to have been made to meet this difficulty,
and for this reason many instruments, of otherwise great merit, have
their efficiency seriously impaired. Fortunately, this imperfection is
easily remedied, all that is required being that the upper surface of
the plug should be furnished with some kind of projection, having at its
summit a table-like expansion, as shown at A in the figure. The
imbedding paraffine, by penetrating beneath and around this, becomes
firmly attached to the plug, and thus all risk of its rising is
effectually avoided. If the student wishes to secure a really
first-class instrument, none can be so confidently recommended as the
freezing microtome of Professor Rutherford. In addition to its being the
best instrument for carrying out the freezing method (§ 18), this
machine is equally effective for cutting tissues imbedded in paraffine,
or any of the other agents used for that purpose; indeed, whatever work
a microtome _can_ do, _this one_ will perform.

Footnote 4:

  Note D.

Footnote 5:

  Note E.

Footnote 6:

  Note F.


    [Illustration: SECTION OF MICROTOME-TUBE SHOWING ARRANGEMENT (A) TO
        PREVENT “RISE” OF PARAFFINE.]


9. _Æther Microtome._—A word here as to freezing microtomes, where the
agent used is æther. Such as have fallen under our notice have not
answered the expectations we were justly entitled to form of them. That
it is possible to freeze a piece of tissue by their use is undeniable,
but it is, as a rule, at an expenditure of such a quantity of æther
(only the very best of which must be used) as to constitute it a very
expensive proceeding. Another serious disadvantage they possess is, that
if the supply of æther be intermitted for only a very short time, the
already frozen tissue thaws with great and most inconvenient rapidity.

10. _Section-Knife._—Of not less importance than the microtome is the
section-knife, to be used in conjunction with it. How perfect soever the
former, and whatever the dexterity of the operator, unless he be
provided with a suitable and well-made knife, he will never succeed in
obtaining satisfactory results. As to the most desirable _size_ of the
knife, much difference of opinion seems to exist, section knives varying
in this respect from a blade of extreme shortness to one which fell
under our observation, in which the portentous length of _thirteen_
inches was attained. What advantages were to be expected by prolonging
the blade to this extravagant length, must remain an inscrutable mystery
to all save its designer. Concerning the _shape_ of the knife, it is
frequently advised that the surface which has to glide along the
cutting-plate of the microtome should be ground _flat_. A most
unsuitable arrangement, as a very little actual experience of
section-cutting will speedily demonstrate. After many unsuccessful
attempts to obtain a really good and reliable section-knife, we
determined to have one specially made, which, as it has proved
everything that could be desired, merits a brief description. It is of
the utmost importance that the blade be made of good and well-tempered
steel, not only that it may be capable of receiving an edge of the most
exquisite keenness, but also that it may _retain it_. The knife of which
we speak (and which was made by Mr. Gardner, of South Bridge, Edinburgh)
is furnished with a blade _four inches_ long, and 7/8-inch broad, set
into a square handle of boxwood, also four inches in length. The
thickness of the blade at the back is not quite 1/4-inch, while _both_
of its surfaces are slightly hollow ground. It is essentially necessary
that the back and edge of the blade be strictly parallel to each other,
otherwise the knife, when in use, will have such a tendency to tilt over
as to render its management extremely difficult. It is very easy to
discover if this condition be fulfilled, for if on carefully laying the
flat of the blade upon a piece of level glass, every portion of both
back and edge are found to be in close contact with it, the knife may in
this respect be considered perfect. Every student who aspires to be a
successful section-cutter should provide himself with a good Turkey
oilstone, _and learn to use it_. He should also possess a razor strop,
as it will be in constant requisition.[7] It may here be remarked that
though _razors_, as a rule, are unsuitable for use with the microtome
from want of uniformity in the thickness of their blades, yet, if only a
small object is to be cut—for instance, a thin root or stem—very good
results may be obtained from their use, especially if one of the
old-fashioned make, having a thick back and slightly _concave_ surfaces,
be employed.

11. _Imbedding in Paraffine for Microtome._—Having described at some
length the various instruments necessary for section-cutting, we will
now consider how they are to be used. Let us endeavor to cut some
sections—say of a piece of kidney—and in so doing we will adopt the
“paraffine” method of imbedding. Ordinary paraffine, however, when used
alone, is rather too hard for our purpose. In order, therefore, to bring
it to a suitable consistence, it must be mixed with one-fifth its weight
of common unsalted lard, a gentle heat applied, and the two thoroughly
stirred together. A quantity of this should be prepared, so that it may
always be ready when wanted—it is very conveniently kept in an ointment
pot or preserve jar, the top of the latter being well covered, to keep
out the dust. When it is intended to use this mixture for the purpose of
imbedding, only just about the quantity required should be melted; for
in doing this it is advisable to use as low a degree of heat as
possible, not only to prevent injury to the tissue to be imbedded, but
also that the paraffine when cooling may not undergo such an amount of
contraction as to cause it to shrink from the sides of the
microtome-tube. It is therefore a good plan to effect the melting in a
water-bath, a simple kind of which, something after the fashion of a
glue-pot, would be made for a few pence by any tinman.

Footnote 7:

  See Note G.

The kidney which we are about to cut has, of course, gone through the
process of hardening already described (§ 5), and is now preserved in
spirit. A small piece, say half an inch square, is selected, removed
with forceps, and placed on a bit of blotting paper, when the surface of
the tissue will rapidly become dry (_only the surface_ must be allowed
to dry). It is the usual plan now to proceed at once to imbed it in the
melted paraffine. This is a most undesirable step, and gives rise at a
later stage of our proceedings to a great amount of trouble and
annoyance, for after sections have been cut from a tissue so imbedded it
will be found that portions of paraffine adhere to their edges with such
tenacity that in the case of many of them there is no effectual method
of removing the paraffine, short of soaking the sections in warm æther;
a very objectionable proceeding, for though the æther will undoubtedly
remove the paraffine, it will also dissolve out any fatty matters which
the section itself may naturally contain. All this annoyance may be
prevented by subjecting the tissue to a simple preparatory treatment
before it is imbedded in the paraffine. For this purpose prepare a very
_weak_ solution of gum arabic in water—twenty grains to the ounce. Into
this, by means of the forceps, dip for a few moments the already
_surface-dried_ tissue, taking special care not to squeeze it, or the
pressure will cause the spirit from its interior to remoisten the
surface, which would prevent the gum from adhering. We shall see the
value of this a little later on. Remove the tissue from the solution on
to blotting paper, when the superfluous gum will speedily drain off, and
in two or three minutes the _surface_ will have become quite glazy and
dry. Having melted some paraffine mixture in the water-bath, the tissue
held in the forceps must be plunged for an instant into the heated
liquid and immediately withdrawn, when the crust of paraffine with which
it is enveloped will promptly harden. Whilst this is taking place we may
make ready the microtome. Having by means of the milled head or handle
depressed the plug in the tube so as to leave a free opening about an
inch deep at its upper end, we must pour in the melted paraffine, which
by this time will have become a little cooler, until the cavity be about
half filled. The prepared tissue must now be introduced, care being
taken to place it in such a position that the sections may be cut in the
desired direction. The tissue must, if necessary, be held in position
with forceps or a needle point, till the imbedding material becomes hard
enough to give it due support. It is here to be remembered that it will
not be advisable to place the tissue in the centre of the tube—it will
be much more easily cut if placed rather nearer to that edge of the tube
which is situated next the operator in the act of cutting. More
paraffine is to be slowly added, until the tissue is completely covered;
even after this still more should be added, for it will be found that in
cooling the paraffine shrinks so as to leave a cup-shaped depression in
its centre, whereby portions of the tissue which were previously covered
are again laid bare. The best method of preventing this is to use the
paraffine at as low a temperature as possible, and to use plenty of it.
The microtome, with its contents, must now be removed to a cool place,
when the paraffine will soon become solidified. Whilst this is being
accomplished we may make our further preparations. The first thing we
require will be a large basin, full of freshly-filtered water, and
provided with a cover. A small beaker of methylated spirit, with a
dipping rod or pipette, will also be necessary. We must now see that the
section-knife is in thorough order, to ensure which it will be advisable
to give it a few turns on the strop. An ordinary razor will also be of
service.

12. _Employment of Microtome._—The paraffine being sufficiently hard, we
will clamp the microtome on to the table, and seat ourselves on a chair
of convenient height before it. To our right stand the basin of water,
razor, and section-knife; the beaker of spirit to the left, and a cloth
on our knee. A few turns of the microtome screw having brought the
paraffine to the surface, a thick slice is to be cut off, and this
repeated until the imbedded tissue comes into view. This preliminary
work had best be done with the razor, as it is needless to subject our
section-knife to unnecessary wear and tear. By a fractional revolution
of the screw the tissue is now slightly elevated, and with the pipette
held in the left hand, a large drop of spirit is to be let fall upon its
surface. The section-knife, grasped firmly but lightly in the right
hand, is to be laid flat upon the cutting-plate of the machine, so as to
occupy the diagonal position shown in the figure. Two fingers of the
left hand are now laid gently upon the back of the blade, so as to give
it an equable support, whilst the knife with a rapid motion is pushed in
the combined direction of _forwards_ and to the _left_, so that the
blade in cutting the tissue will pass through it from point to heel.
Thus it will be observed that the stroke of the knife is _from_ the
operator—a far easier and more effective mode of cutting than the
reverse plan. The blade of the knife, having the section just cut,
either floating in a small pool of spirit on its surface or adhering
thereto, must now be immersed in the basin of water, when by a little
very gentle agitation of the knife the section will be floated off. And
now we shall find the great practical value of immersing the tissue in
gum before imbedding, for no sooner is the section disengaged from the
knife than the thin film of gum which separates the paraffine from it
becomes dissolved, and the section will be observed gradually to subside
to the bottom, leaving the paraffine floating upon the surface. After
carefully wiping the knife from all shreds of paraffine, the microtome
screw must again be partially revolved, more spirit applied to the
tissue, and another section being cut, it must be transferred to the
water as before, and so on, until a sufficient number of sections have
been obtained. As to how thin the sections should be cut, no general
directions can be given; each case must be regulated by its own
conditions. The denser the tissue, the thinner should the section be;
whilst certain substances of loose and spongy texture do not require the
sections to be particularly thin—it may be said, however, in a general
way that sections, and especially animal ones, _cannot be cut too thin_
so long as they remain perfect and entire. If Professor Rutherford’s
microtome (as made by Gardner) be employed, the head of the screw will
be found to be graduated into divisions of slightly unequal value; the
sections will therefore be marked by corresponding variations of
thickness, so that amongst a number cut, there must be many of the exact
thickness to meet the requirements of any individual case.


    [Illustration: DIAGRAM SHOWING DIAGONAL POSITION OF KNIFE IN
        COMMENCING TO MAKE A SECTION.]


13. _Staining Agents._—Before proceeding to mount the sections which
have just been cut, it will be very advisable that they should be
submitted to the action of some staining fluid, in order to render more
clear and distinct their minute structure. Organic substances possess
the property of being able to absorb various colouring matters from
their solution, and to incorporate such colour into their own texture.
This power of attraction is not, however, possessed by all substances
indiscriminately, or to an equal extent. Some possess it in a high
degree, while others appear to be nearly, if not entirely, devoid of
such power. Hence it follows, that if we immerse an organic tissue (one
of our sections, for instance) of complex structure, in a suitable
staining fluid, the tissue will not become stained in an even and
uniform manner throughout, but the several portions of it will receive
varying depths of colour in accordance with the varying attractive power
of its several constituents. By this means we are enabled in stained
sections to discriminate by their difference of shade, minute and
delicate structures, which in the unstained condition it would be
difficult and often impossible to differentiate. For the purpose of
section-staining there are many agents in use, the most generally
suitable being carmine, logwood (§ 19), and aniline blue (§ 27); whilst
for special purposes chloride of gold (§ 28), pyrogallate of iron (§
28), and several others are all of much value.

14. _Carmine Staining._—In the case of animal sections, carmine is, as a
rule, to be selected, giving as it does most satisfactory and beautiful
results. Tissues may be stained with carmine by two different plans: in
the first, a strong solution is used, and the tissue subjected to its
action for a very short period only, whilst in the latter only very weak
solutions are employed, the time of immersion being considerably
prolonged. The rapid method, however, is not to be recommended, for the
strong carmine acts so powerfully upon the tissue as to give the various
elements comprising it no time, as it were, to exercise their power of
quantitive selection, but involves the whole in one uniform degree of
shadeless colour. By adopting the gradual method much better results are
obtained, each portion of the tissue being now at liberty to acquire its
own particular shade. Amongst the various formulæ for the preparation of
carmine fluid, none can be so safely followed as that devised by Dr.
Lionel Beale. It runs thus:—Place ten grains of the finest carmine in a
test tube, add thirty minims of strong liquor ammonia, boil, add two
ounces of distilled water, and filter; then add two ounces of glycerine,
and half an ounce of rectified spirit—this solution ought to be kept in
a well stoppered bottle. The best vessels in which to stain sections are
small jars of white porcelain, capable of holding about two fluid
ounces, and furnished with lids—they are much preferable to beakers or
watch glasses, for owing to the white background which they afford it is
very easy to watch how the staining is proceeding. The carmine solution
which we have just described is both too strong and of too great density
to be used in its pure state. It will, therefore, require to be diluted
with distilled water before use—the most useful degree of dilution being
attained by adding one part of stain to seven of water. Sections may be
placed in this solution for twenty-four hours, in which time they will
usually be found to have acquired a sufficient depth of colour. If,
however, the tissue be unusually difficult to stain, the time of
immersion may be doubled, or still further prolonged, without detriment
to the section.


    [Illustration: SECTION SPOON.]


Having prepared and filtered some of this dilute solution, say an ounce,
let us proceed to stain with it those sections which we left in the
basin of water (§ 12). Here we are at once met by a practical
difficulty. How are the sections to be transferred from one vessel to
the other? This is ordinarily effected by means of a soft camel’s-hair
pencil. It is a method, however, open to grave objections, for the
sections so curl around the brush, and get entangled amidst its hairs,
that, notwithstanding every care, valuable sections not unfrequently
become torn during transit. Every difficulty at once vanishes if we
substitute for the brush a small implement, which any one can readily
make for himself. All that is necessary is to take a strip of
German-silver, or copper, of the thickness of stout cardboard, and about
seven inches in length by five-eighths of an inch in breadth. The sharp
angles are to be filed off and the edges carefully smoothed, whilst at a
distance of five-eighths of an inch from each extremity the end must be
turned up so as to form an angle of about 35°. One end must be left
plain, whilst the other, with the aid of a punch or drill, is to be
pierced with five holes about the thickness of a stocking needle[8] (see
Figure). If we now dip the perforated end of this spoon into the water
containing the sections, and gently agitate it, the sections will rise
from the bottom and float about. The spoon is now brought under one of
them, and being steadily lifted up the water flows downwards through its
apertures, and the section smoothly spreading itself out upon the spoon,
may be gently lifted out of the water, and on the spoon being dipped
into the staining fluid the section at once floats off. By this simple
means sections, however large, thin or delicate, may with ease be
conveyed from one fluid to another, with the utmost certainty of their
not being injured during the process. The sections having been in the
carmine fluid for about twenty-four hours, as much of the liquor as is
possible must be gently poured off, and its place supplied by a
freshly-filtered mixture of five drops of glacial-acetic acid to one
ounce of water, when in a few moments the carmine will become
permanently _fixed_ in the tissue, and the process of staining be
complete.

Footnote 8:

  Dr. Klein describes a kind of “lifter,” made by bending some
  German-silver wire, but as no drawing accompanies his description, it
  is not easy to form a clear idea as to the form of this instrument. In
  the recent and philosophical work of Schäfer, a lifter is figured,
  which consists of a wire stem, having attached to its end a spade-like
  blade. It will be observed that the spoon described in the text
  differs from this lifter in having one end perforated, and in this
  consists the real value of the implement.

15. _Mounting Media._—The further treatment of the stained sections will
entirely depend upon the nature of the medium in which it is intended to
mount them. There are a variety of fluids in use for this purpose, the
principal being dilute alcohol (§ 26), dammar, or Canada balsam (§
22-23), and glycerine. These, however, cannot be used indiscriminately,
each possessing certain special properties which render it suitable for
use with particular classes of objects only. Thus, weak spirit, having
no tendency to increase the transparency of objects, can advantageously
be used with such only as are already perfectly transparent. It is also
more suitable for the preservation of vegetable tissues (when the
retention of colour is no object) than animal, since with the latter it
has a tendency after a while to cause a kind of granular disintegration,
which ultimately destroys much of the usefulness of the preparation.
Dammar and Canada balsam, on the other hand, possess very great
refractive power, so that they are of great service in mounting objects
which require their transparency to be much increased. For this reason
they are not well adapted to the preservation of very delicate or
transparent tissues (unless previously stained), the minute details of
which become almost entirely obliterated when mounted in them. The chief
advantage possessed by these resinous media is, that tissues mounted in
them undergo no alteration, even after the lapse of many years.
Glycerine, in respect of its clarifying powers, occupies an intermediate
position between spirit and balsam, being much more refractive than the
former, infinitely less so than the latter. It is, therefore, of very
great value for the preservation of such tissues as possess a medium
degree of transparency, and which would become obscured if mounted in
spirit, or have their outlines rendered indistinct if preserved in
balsam. It is of the utmost value for mounting unstained anatomical
sections which, when put up in this medium, reveal such minute details
of structure as would readily have escaped observation had any other
agent been employed. It may also be used with stained sections, but in
this case the sections should be of extreme thinness, otherwise the
refractive power of the glycerine will be insufficient to render them
thoroughly transparent. The great drawback to the use of glycerine is
the extreme difficulty experienced in preventing its escape from beneath
the covering glass, for it unfortunately possesses such great
penetrating power that no cement hitherto devised can be thoroughly
depended upon for withstanding its solvent action for any considerable
length of time.[9] Attention to the instructions presently to be given
(§ 16) will, however, reduce this risk of leakage to a minimum. In the
use of glycerine Dr. Carpenter’s caution must ever be borne in mind,
viz., that, as carbonate of lime is in time dissolved by glycerine, this
agent ought never to be employed for the preservation of objects
containing such salt.

Footnote 9:

  Note H.

16. _Mounting in Glycerine._—To illustrate the method of using this
medium we will mount our present sections in glycerine. In the first
place we shall require a deep watch-glass, which is to be half filled
with glycerine diluted with an equal amount of distilled water. By means
of the spoon, one or more sections may be transferred into this, either
directly from the acetic acid solution (§ 14), or if, since cutting,
they have been preserved in spirit, they should first undergo a short
immersion in a large vessel full of water. The watch-glass should now be
covered with an inverted wine-glass, and put away for some hours, in
order that the sections may become thoroughly saturated with the dilute
glycerine. When this has been accomplished, a slide must be cleaned, and
one of the sections, with the aid of the _unpierced_ end of the spoon,
be transferred to its centre.[10] As the kind of section with which we
are now dealing is, or ought to be, of extreme thinness, no cell (§ 26)
is necessary. After tilting up one end of the slide, so as to drain off
as much of the weak glycerine as possible, a drop of Price’s best
glycerine must, with a glass rod or pipette, be allowed to fall gently
upon the section, so as to avoid the formation of air-bubbles. If any of
these, however, should be produced, they must be removed with the point
of a needle set in a wooden handle,[11] and the slide then covered with
a small bell-glass (or wine-glass). A circular cover is now to be
cleaned with a soft handkerchief, and after gently blowing from it any
adhering fibres of lint, etc., it will be advisable to hold the side of
the glass which is to come into contact with the preparation close to
the mouth, and breathe upon it, so as to cover it with moisture. The
cover held between the thumb and forefinger of the left hand must now be
applied by its edge near to the margin of the preparation, and the
surface of the cover directed in an inclined manner over it. Beneath the
overhanging edge of the cover the point of the needle, held in the right
hand, is now to be inserted (see Figure). By gently lowering the needle,
the cover will come into gradual contact with the slide, driving before
it a minute wave of glycerine, in which any air-bubbles that may have
become developed are usually carried off. A very considerable degree of
tact, however, is required to perform this little operation, simple as
it may appear, for the retreating wave of glycerine not unfrequently
floats out the section, either wholly or partially, from beneath the
cover. Air-bubbles, also (the _bêtes noires_ of this process), are
exceedingly likely to arise. When this happens the best plan to adopt
is, by means of the needle point, gently to raise and remove the cover,
apply another drop of glycerine to the section, and cover _with a fresh
piece of thin glass_. It will now be necessary to remove any superfluous
glycerine which may have collected around and near the cover. The great
bulk must be wiped away by means of a camel’s-hair pencil, slightly
wetted between the lips, any remaining stickiness being removed with a
bit of blotting paper which has been slightly damped. With a very small
camel’s-hair pencil, charged with solution of gelatine, a ring must be
made round the margin of the cover, of sufficient breadth to take in a
small tract of both cover and slide. As this cement is perfectly
miscible with glycerine, it readily unites with any of that fluid which
may ooze from beneath the cover, and which, in the case of any of the
ordinary varnishes, would act as a fatal obstacle to perfect adhesion.
To make the cement, take half an ounce of Nelson’s opaque gelatine, put
in a small beaker, add sufficient cold water to cover it, and allow the
mixture to remain until the gelatine has become thoroughly soaked. The
water is now poured off, and heat applied until the gelatine becomes
fluid, when three drops of creosote should be well stirred in, and the
fluid mixture transferred to a small bottle to solidify. Before use,
this compound must be rendered liquid by immersing the bottle containing
it in a cup of warm water. When the ring of gelatine has become quite
set and dry (which will not take long), every trace of glycerine must be
carefully removed from the cover and its neighborhood, by gently
swabbing these parts with a large camel’s-hair pencil dipped in
methylated spirit. After drying the slide a ring of Bell’s microscopical
cement may be applied over the gelatine, and, when this is dry, another
coat is to be laid on. If it be desired to give the slide a neat and
tasteful appearance, it is a very easy matter, by means of the
turn-table, to lay on a final ring of Brunswick black or white zinc
cement (§ 24). Every care has now been taken to render our preparation
permanent; but, to make assurance doubly sure, it will be well to follow
Dr. Carpenter’s advice, and, every year or so, to lay on a thin coating
of good gold-size.[12]

Footnote 10:

  The appearance of a slide is vastly improved if the preparation be
  placed _exactly_ in its centre. This may readily be done in the
  following manner:—Take some very finely-powdered Prussian blue, and
  rub it up in a mortar with a little of the weak gum solution (§ 11),
  so as to form a thin blue pigment. A quantity of this should be made,
  so as always to be at hand. A slide having been cleaned, the _best
  surface_ is to be selected, and on the _reverse_ side, by means of the
  self-centring turn-table, a small circle is to be drawn with a
  camel’s-hair pencil, charged with the pigment. In the centre of this
  ring, but on the opposite side of the slide, the section is to be
  placed, when it of course will occupy a position exactly central. When
  the slide comes to be finished, the blue ring may easily be removed
  with a wet rag.

Footnote 11:

   A _crochet-needle_ holder made of bone, and which may be bought at
  the smallware dealers’ for about sixpence, makes an admirable handle
  for microscopical needles. At one extremity there is a small cavity,
  closed with a cap, for the storage of reserve needles, whilst the
  other end terminates in a metal tip, provided with a crucial slit and
  central perforation for the reception of the needle in actual use, and
  so arranged that, by means of a small screw-nut, needles of various
  sizes may be firmly held in position.

Footnote 12:

  If square covers be employed, they may be fixed to the slide by a
  simple method much in vogue in Germany. A thin wax taper is to be
  lighted, and being partially inverted for a few seconds, the wax
  surrounding the wick will become melted. After the slide has been
  freed from excess of glycerine, a drop of this heated wax is allowed
  to fall upon each corner of the cover, and a line of the melted wax
  run along the margins of the cover between these points, so as
  perfectly to surround it. If a good coat of white zinc cement be
  subsequently laid over the wax a very durable, and not unornamental,
  line of union will have been formed.


    [Illustration: METHOD OF APPLYING COVER.]


17. _Use of Freezing Microtome._—Our preceding consideration of the
method of employing the microtome in conjunction with paraffine as an
imbedding agent (§ 11), will have formed a very suitable introduction to
the study of the somewhat more complicated process of imbedding the
tissue in gum, for section in the freezing microtome. This method is of
the utmost value to the practical histologist, for by its means he is
enabled with ease to possess himself of perfect sections of several
structures, the cutting of which, before the introduction of this
process, was always a matter of difficulty and anxiety. The freezing
microtome is especially valuable for the section of such substances as
from their extreme delicacy are liable to be injured by being imbedded
in paraffine—for instance, the delicate villi of the intestines becomes
very frequently, by the use of paraffine, denuded of their epithelium,
and the villi themselves not seldom become torn off or otherwise
damaged. The great value of the method is also very well seen in the
treatment of those tissues which, like the lung, are of such loose and
spongy texture as to offer insufficient resistance to the knife unless
their interstices have previously been filled up with some solid yet
easily cut material. As the space at our command is strictly limited, we
are precluded from entering as fully into this branch of section-cutting
as the importance of the subject demands and our own inclination would
lead us. To those who wish to become thoroughly conversant with the full
value of this method we cannot do better than recommend the perusal of
Professor Rutherford’s _Practical Histology_, 2d edition, than which, on
the whole subject of physiological microscopy, no treatise with which we
are acquainted is at once so plain, practical, and profound.

18. _Employment of Freezing Microtome._—A very suitable object with
which to demonstrate the method of using this form of microtome will be
afforded us by a portion of intestine, say of the ileum of a cat or dog.
Suppose we have some of this in methylated spirit—let us select a piece
of about half an inch in length. Our first care will be to deprive this
of its spirit; for so long as the tissue remains impregnated with
alcohol it would, of course, be impossible to freeze it. We will,
therefore, throw it into a large basinful of water, and leave it there
for twenty-four hours, during which time it would be as well to change
the water once or twice. We shall now require a strong solution of gum.
This, which should have been made some time previously, may be prepared
by placing a quantity, say three or four ounces, of ordinary gum arabic
in a glass beaker, and adding sufficient water to cover it—the mixture
must be stirred occasionally with a glass rod until solution has taken
place, which will be in a few days. If _necessary_ a little more water
may be added, but so long as the gum will pour from vessel to vessel, it
cannot well be made too strong. Mucilage, by keeping, is very apt to
become sour and mouldy—this may be prevented by adding to each ounce of
the water with which it is prepared about half a grain of salicylic
acid. We now pour some of this mucilage into a small vessel—an egg cup
will answer very well—and into it transfer the piece of ileum from the
water. Here we must allow it to remain for a time sufficient to permit
of its becoming thoroughly saturated with the gum, for which purpose
some hours will be necessary. When this soaking has been accomplished we
will prepare the microtome, which we will assume to be Rutherford’s. In
the first place it will be necessary to remove the plug—which is to be
done by turning the handle connected with the screw until the plug rises
so high in its tube that it may be grasped with the fingers and removed,
when it is to be well smeared all over with sperm oil and replaced. This
is done to prevent any unpleasant adhesions taking place whilst the
freezing is going on. We must next depress the plug, so as to convert
the upper part of the tube into a kind of “well” of sufficient depth to
hold our specimen. It will now be very advisable to look carefully into
this _well_ and observe whether the plug fits accurately into the tube
(§ 8) for if there be any interval between the two it will give rise to
much subsequent annoyance, as the gum penetrating this interstice will
there become firmly frozen into irregular patches, which will so
interfere with the even gliding of the plug within its tube as to cause
the former to ascend in such an irregular and jerky manner as to be
utterly destructive of all accuracy in the cutting. If this defect be
observed, it may be at once remedied by dropping a small quantity of
gently heated paraffine into the _well_, which will effectually close up
any fissures. The microtome, by means of its clamping arrangement, must
now be firmly attached to the table, and a suitable vessel be placed on
the floor beneath it, so that it may catch the water which will issue
from the waste-pipe of the apparatus. The next requirement is a supply
of block ice and finely-powdered salt. A lump of the ice must be wrapped
in a towel, and crushed into small pieces; these, by means of a large
mortar, are to be further reduced to a very _fine powder_. Any attempt
to hurry over this troublesome part of the operation will lead to future
disappointment, for unless the ice be used in a very fine powder great
delay (at least) in the freezing will be the result. With the aid of a
small spoon the ice and salt are in alternate spoonsful to be conveyed
into the freezing-box of the machine, great care being taken that the
cavity under the cutting-plate and around the tube be thoroughly packed,
after which the uncovered portion of the box should also be well filled.
The _well_ is now to be filled with the strong gum to within a little
distance of its top, and a piece of sheet gutta-percha (such as shoe
soles are made of) being applied over the well, and kept in position by
a weight, we must wait until the freezing commences. In a short time we
shall notice that the gum has acquired a thick muddy appearance. The
tissue must now, by means of the forceps, be transferred to the well,
and there placed in such a position that the sections, when cut, shall
run in the desired direction. After more gum has, if necessary, been
added, so as completely to cover the tissue, the well is again to be
covered, and attention given to the freezing-box. As the mixture which
this contains becomes melted, it must constantly be renewed, care being
at the same time taken that the mouth of the discharge-pipe be kept
quite free, otherwise water accumulating in the box, the freezing
mixture will degenerate into a useless puddle. When the gum becomes
sufficiently hard to cut, this must be done much in the same manner as
if paraffine had been used (§ 12). In this case, however, no fluid will
be required, or must be used, to wet the knife with, and especial care
must be taken that in disengaging the sections from the knife into the
water they be not torn. These sections often adhere very tenaciously to
the blade, but if a little patience be exercised the water will soon
float them off in safety—much more safely than if any attempt be made to
liberate them prematurely. There is one circumstance connected with the
use of the freezing microtome which is rather annoying. The moisture of
the breath and atmosphere is apt to become condensed on the
cutting-plate, and here, mixed with accidental smears of gum, it becomes
frozen into a jagged and irregular sheet of ice, which not only
seriously interferes with the smooth play of the knife, but also
constitutes a real peril to its edge. As this evil cannot be avoided,
all we can do is, by constant wiping, to keep the cutting-plate clean
and free from this accumulation. This is best done with a bit of soft
rag _just moistened_ with spirit, but this must not come into contact
with any portion of the cylinder of frozen gum, else it will instantly
thaw it. When using the freezing microtome it is always advisable to
wear an apron, otherwise our clothes may receive considerable damage
from the constant splashing of the salt water, as it falls from the
waste-pipe into the vessel beneath it. After use, the microtome must be
well washed in plenty of cold water till every trace of salt be removed,
for if any of this remain it will quickly corrode the brass-work of the
instrument. The plug and screw, as also the section-knife, should be
well smeared with Rangoon oil before the machine is put away.

19. _Logwood Staining._—The employment of logwood as a staining agent is
now becoming very general. It acts much in the same manner as carmine,
but the violet color which it produces is by many thought to be of a
more soft and agreeable character than that due to the action of
carmine. A valuable and very convenient property also which it possesses
is that it stains tissues very rapidly, and this without interfering
with that differential kind of coloration (§ 14) upon which the chief
value of all staining processes depends. A simple method of preparing
the logwood fluid is to mix an aqueous solution of extract of logwood
with a solution of alum (1 to 8) till the deep impure red colour has
become violet, and then to filter the mixture (Frey). This will stain
sections in about half an hour. This stain, though here mentioned for
the ease with which it may be made is, as a rule, very inferior to a
fluid prepared directly from hæmatoxylon, the alkaloid or active
principle of logwood. As, however, it is difficult and troublesome to
make the solution in this manner,[13] it will be advisable for the
student to purchase, ready prepared, such small quantity of the dye as
he may require. Small bottles may be obtained for a few pence of Mr.
Martindale, 10, New Cavendish Street, London, and from repeated trials
of this solution we can recommend it as producing excellent results. It
is a very strong fluid, and requires to be diluted before use. The
degree to which the dilution must be carried cannot, however, be very
accurately indicated, for all staining fluids of this nature possess the
very undesirable property of becoming decomposed by age. After the fluid
has been kept for some time, a portion of the colouring matter is thrown
out of solution, and becomes deposited upon the sides and bottom of the
vessel in which it is contained, hence the older the preparation, the
weaker it will have become. As the time required for staining with
logwood is but short, it is desirable that all the sections should begin
to be submitted to its action at the same time, otherwise some will
become more deeply stained than others. A good plan is to fill a small
porcelain jar (§ 14) with filtered water, and into this transfer the
sections. Whilst they are settling well down to the bottom, a mixture
must be prepared of half a drachm of Martindale’s solution (fresh) to
one ounce of distilled water, and everything got in readiness for its
immediate filtration. The water is now very gently to be poured off the
sections, and if care be exercised this may be done in such a manner as
to leave them undisturbed at the bottom, after removing almost every
drop of water. The diluted logwood fluid must now be _immediately_
filtered upon the sections, so that they may run no risk of becoming
dry. In the present instance the staining may be allowed to proceed for
about thirty minutes, and this will be found a convenient time for the
immersion of the general run of animal sections. If the logwood fluid be
not quite fresh, either a little more of it will have to be added to the
water, or the time of immersion must be prolonged until the desired
depth of color has been produced. It is well whilst the staining is
going on gently to shake the vessel occasionally, so that the sections
may not remain in a heap at the bottom, but all be as fully as possible
exposed to the action of the dye. When the staining is judged to be
complete, the logwood solution must be gently poured off, leaving the
stained sections at the bottom of the jar, when they should be quickly
covered with methylated spirit, which will _fix_ the colour. We shall
now be able to see if the coloration obtained be perfectly satisfactory.
If not deep enough, it is very easy again to submit them to the action
of the dye for a few minutes longer. If on the other hand, and as more
frequently happens, the coloration should be too deep, the excess of
colour may readily be removed by transferring the sections for a short
time into some diluted acetic acid prepared by adding five drops of the
glacial acid to an ounce of water. The action of this should be
carefully watched, and when the colour has been reduced to the desired
tint the sections may be retransferred to the methylated spirit.

Footnote 13:

  Should the student, however, determine to prepare this solution for
  himself, he will find a good formula for the purpose in Schäfer’s
  “Practical Histology,” p 176. Note I.

20. _Absolute Alcohol._—As we purpose mounting the sections which have
just been stained, in Canada balsam, we will briefly consider the
preliminary treatment to which they must be submitted before this can be
effected. The object of this is to abstract from the tissue all its
water, for if any moisture be permitted to remain in the section it
will, when mounted in balsam, become obscured and surrounded by a kind
of opalescent halo, due to the imperfect penetration of the balsam into
the only partially dehydrated tissue. The old-fashioned plan of
dehydration was simple exposure to the air. The method now generally
adopted is to bring about the same result by means of absolute alcohol.
This fluid has such a strong affinity for water that tissues submitted
to its influence are rapidly and effectually deprived of any water they
may contain. Absolute alcohol in small quantity may be obtained from the
druggist at about sixpence per ounce. It will be necessary for the
student to provide himself with a little of this agent, say about two
ounces, the method of using which will very shortly be explained.
Absolute alcohol must be kept in a bottle with a very accurately-fitting
stopper, in order to prevent its absorbing moisture from the air. For
our purpose such a bottle, having a neck _as wide as possible_, is to be
selected.

21. _Clove Oil._—After being thoroughly dehydrated the sections may, in
special instances (§ 48), be at once mounted in balsam; but, as a
general rule, it will be found necessary (particularly in the case of
animal sections) to treat them with some clarifying agent, in order to
remove the cloudiness and opacity which is (in part) due to their
previous immersion in alcohol. For this purpose turpentine, or any of
the essential oils, may be used: of these, oil of cloves is to be
specially recommended. It is rather expensive, ranging from sixpence to
one shilling per ounce: but, as a drop or two will be sufficient for
preparing each slide, only a small quantity—say half an ounce or an
ounce—need be procured. The most convenient vessel in which to keep the
oil is one of the small test bottles used by watchmakers. These bottles
are provided with a glass cap to exclude dust, and the stopper is
prolonged into a glass rod, which dips into the bottle. The use of this
rod and the method of employing the oil will be explained shortly.

22. _Canada Balsam_, as ordinarily met with, is a thick resinous balm of
great viscidity, but readily rendered perfectly fluid by the application
of heat. Formerly, sections were mounted in this medium in its pure
state, but owing to the annoyance which was so constantly being
experienced from the tenacity with which intruding air-bubbles were held
by the viscous medium, this plan of mounting is rapidly falling out of
use.[14] It is now usual to employ the balsam in a diluted condition,
the two chief diluents being chloroform and benzole. As balsam, however,
often contains more or less moisture, it is desirable to drive this off
before adding the diluent. A very convenient way of doing so is to
expose some pure balsam to the heat of a cool oven for several hours,
when the balsam will be found to have assumed a hard, vitreous
character. It should now be broken into small pieces, these put into a
bottle, and some methylated chloroform added, which in a little while
will completely dissolve the hardened balsam. More chloroform is then to
be added, until a solution is obtained sufficiently thin to run through
filtering-paper. A glass spirit lamp must now be procured, having a
capacity of about two ounces, and provided with a cap. Into the
wick-holder of this (which must be made of porcelain) a hollow glass
tube is to be so fitted that its end dips into the lamp to within about
a third of the bottom. (See Fig.) The thin chloroform-balsam is now to
be filtered into this lamp, very fine filtering-paper—through which a
little chloroform has first been passed—being used for the purpose. When
the lamp is full it must (deprived of its cap) be put in a warm place
until sufficient of the chloroform has evaporated to leave behind it a
fluid of the consistence of thin syrup.

Footnote 14:

  Although we cannot too strongly insist upon the use of
  chloroform-balsam wherever practicable, yet it sometimes happens in
  the mounting of substances of _considerable thickness_, that after all
  the chloroform has evaporated an insufficient amount of balsam is left
  behind to fill up the cavity between slide and cover. In such cases,
  therefore, it is advisable to use pure balsam, which may be done in
  the following manner. The object having been previously thoroughly
  dehydrated by immersion in absolute alcohol, is to be thence
  transferred to a little good turpentine, or benzole, where it should
  remain until perfectly transparent. It is now to be placed in the
  centre of a slide which has been gently warmed, and a drop or two of
  _fresh_ fluid balsam added, the greatest care being taken to prevent
  the formation of air-bubbles. Should such arise they must be touched
  with the point of a heated needle, which will cause them to burst and
  disappear. The chief difficulty of the process has yet to be
  encountered in the application of the cover; for it is during this
  procedure that the development of air-bubbles is most likely to take
  place. This annoyance may, however, be entirely avoided by taking the
  simple precaution of dipping the cover into turpentine before it is
  applied (§ 16), when it will be found that “you can’t get air-bubbles,
  even if you try.” The courtesy of Mr. J. A. Kay, of Chatham, enables
  us to give our readers the benefit of this practical “_wrinkle_.”


    [Illustration: SPIRIT LAMP ADAPTED TO CONTAIN BALSAM.]


23. _Mounting in Balsam._—Let us now return to our sections which, it
will be remembered, were left in methylated spirit (§ 19). These we will
now mount in balsam, and although, of course, any number may be
proceeded with at the same time, yet to avoid confusion, in the
following directions one section only will be spoken of. This section
then is, with the perforated spoon, to be transferred to the bottle of
absolute alcohol, where it may remain for about an hour—considerably
less time is _actually_ required, but as from constant use the spirit
becomes weakened, it is as well to be on the safe side. It must now be
removed to the centre of a clean glass slip, and here the _plain_ end of
the spoon comes into use. If this be employed for effecting the
transfer, it will be found that when the section is being removed from
the alcohol it will bring along with it a small pool of the spirit. A
slight touch of the needle applied to the edge of the section will cause
it to float from the spoon on to the slide, at the same time carrying
the pool of alcohol with it, in which it will gently spread itself out
upon the slide without the faintest risk of injury. The superfluous
spirit is now to be drained off, and just as the section is becoming
glazed and sodden-looking (_not dry_) we must, by means of the long
glass stopper (§ 21), apply to it a large drop of clove oil. The oil,
however, should not be placed on the section, but be allowed to drop on
to the slide near to its margin. By gently tilting the slide the oil
will gradually insinuate itself _beneath_ the section and slowly ascend
through it to the surface. The slide should now be covered with a
bell-glass (or wine-glass), and about two minutes allowed for the oil
thoroughly to saturate the section. As much as possible of the
superfluous oil must then be drained off, and the remainder removed with
blotting paper. By means of the glass rod a small quantity of
chloroform-balsam is now taken from the spirit lamp which contains it,
and allowed gently to fall upon the section, which must then be covered
with a thin glass circle in the manner previously described (§ 16). When
the object is very fragile, it is a good plan, after draining off the
clove oil, to apply the cover directly upon the section, and then to
place a drop of the balsam near to the edge of the cover. This, by
capillary attraction, will speedily diffuse itself beneath the cover,
flowing over and surrounding the object, without in the slightest degree
disturbing its position. If, during the process of mounting, any
air-bubbles arise, we may view their development with equanimity, being
well assured that as the chloroform evaporates they too will quickly
disappear. When the mounting is completed, the slide should be roughly
labelled and placed on a warm mantel-piece for a few days to dry.

24. _Finishing the Slide._—In the course of two or three days it will be
advisable to take an old penknife, and after heating the blade in the
flame of a spirit lamp, gently to run the point of it round the margin
of the cover, so as to remove any excess of balsam which may have oozed
from beneath it. In a few days more, any remaining balsam may be
carefully scraped away with a cold knife. All remaining traces of balsam
are then to be removed from around the cover by means of a rag _just
moistened_ with methylated spirit, or, what is better, with a mixture of
equal parts of spirit and æther, after which the slide is to be
thoroughly washed in cold water. The slide is now in reality finished,
but, in order to give it a smart appearance, it is usual, with the
assistance of the turn-table, to run a ring of colored varnish round the
covering glass. A very useful varnish for the purpose is the _white zinc
cement_. To prepare this, dissolve an ounce of gum dammar in an ounce of
turpentine by the aid of heat. Take one dram of oxide of zinc and an
equal quantity of turpentine; rub them up together in a mortar, adding
the turpentine drop by drop, so as to form a creamy mixture perfectly
free from lumps or grit. One fluid ounce of the dammar solution
previously made must now gradually be added, the mixture being kept
constantly stirred (_Frey_). The cement, when made, should be strained
through a piece of fine muslin, previously wetted with turpentine, into
a small wide-necked bottle, which, instead of having a cork or stopper,
should be covered with a loose metal cap. Instead of a bottle, the
varnish may be kept in one of the collapsible tubes used by artists; but
though this plan is highly recommended by many, it is not without its
disadvantages. If the varnish becomes thick by keeping, a few drops of
turpentine or benzole well stirred in will soon reduce it to a suitable
consistence for use.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PART II.

25. _Special Methods._—Having in the preceding pages entered at some
length into the general subject of section-cutting, it remains for us
now to consider those special methods of preparation which the
peculiarities of certain objects demand. In order to keep the bulk (and
consequent price) of this manualette within due bounds, we shall,
without further preface, proceed to the description of these methods, in
doing which every endeavour will be made to employ such brevity of
expression as may be consistent with perfect clearness of meaning. As
the most convenient plan, the objects here treated of will be arranged
in alphabetical succession.

26. _Bone._—Both transverse and longitudinal sections should be
prepared, the former being the prettier and most interesting. After
prolonged maceration in water, all fat, etc., must be removed and the
bone dried, when as thin a slice as possible is to be cut off in the
desired direction, by means of a very fine saw. If the section so
obtained be placed upon a piece of smooth cork it may, with the aid of a
fine file and the exercise of care, be further reduced in thickness. It
is then to be laid upon a hone moistened with water, and being pressed
gently and _evenly_ down upon it with the tip of the finger (protected,
if necessary, by a bit of cork or gutta-percha), it must be rubbed upon
the stone until the desired degree of thinness has been attained.
Finally, in order to remove scratches and to polish the section, it
should be rubbed upon a dry hone of very fine texture, or upon a strop
charged with putty-powder. After careful washing in several waters the
section must be allowed thoroughly to dry, when it may be mounted by the
_dry method_ in the following manner:—A ring of gold-size must, by means
of the turn-table, be drawn in the centre of a slide, and the slide put
away in a warm place for several days (the longer the better), in order
that the ring may become perfectly dry and hard. When this has been
accomplished the section is to be placed in the centre of the ring, and
a covering circle of the requisite size having been cleaned, this must
have a _thin_ ring of gold-size applied round its margin. The cover is
now to be placed in position and gently pressed down, a spring clip
being employed, if necessary, to prevent it from moving. In about
twenty-four hours another layer of the varnish should be applied, and
the slide afterwards finished in the manner already described (§ 24).
The above method is also applicable to the preparation of sections of
_teeth_ and also of _fruit-stones_ and other hard bodies, which are
incapable of being rendered soft enough for cutting.

As the process just described, however, is both troublesome and tedious,
it is much better for ordinary purposes to have recourse to the
_decalcifying method_, by which means sections in every way suitable for
the examination of the essential structure of bone may be obtained with
ease. To carry out this plan a piece of fresh bone should be cut into
small pieces and placed in a solution made by dissolving 15 grains of
pure chromic acid in 7 ounces of distilled water, to which 30 minims of
nitric acid s. g. 1.420 are afterwards to be added. Here they should
remain for three or four weeks, or until the bone has become
sufficiently soft to cut easily, the fluid being repeatedly changed
during the process. From this solution they must be transferred to
methylated spirit for a few days, when a piece may be selected, imbedded
in paraffine, and cut in the microtome (§ 12). Some of the sections
should be mounted, unstained, in spirit. For this purpose a cell of
gold-size, as above described, must first be prepared and filled _full_
of a mixture of spirit of wine one part, and distilled water three
parts. Into this the section must be carefully placed and the cover
applied, the same precautions for the exclusion of air-bubbles being
taken which were recommended when speaking of mounting in glycerine (§
16). When the cover is in position a ring of gold-size must be laid on,
repeated when dry, and the slide afterwards finished in the ordinary
manner. It will also be advisable to stain some of the sections with
carmine (§ 14), or picro-carmine (§ 42), and mount them in glycerine.
_Teeth_ may also be treated by the decalcifying method, but in this case
it must be remembered that the enamel will dissolve away.

27. _Brain._—The best hardening fluid is that recommended by Rutherford,
and is made by dissolving 15 grains of pure chromic acid and 31 grains
of crystalized bichromate of potash in 43 ounces of distilled water.
Small pieces of brain, which have previously been immersed for
twenty-four hours in rectified spirit, should be placed in about a pint
of this solution, where they must remain for five or six weeks, the
fluid being repeatedly changed during the process. If by this time they
are not sufficiently hard the induration must be completed in alcohol.
Sections are easily cut in the microtome by the paraffine method (§ 12).
These may advantageously be stained in a solution of aniline blue, made
by dissolving 1-1/2 grain of aniline blue in 10 ounces of distilled
water, and adding 1 drachm of rectified spirit (_Frey_). As this stain
acts very rapidly two or three minutes’ immersion will generally be
found long enough. The sections must then be mounted in balsam (§ 23).

28. _Cartilage._—The method to be employed in the preparation of
cartilage will entirely depend upon the nature of the staining agent, to
the action of which the sections are to be submitted. Thus, if the
elegant _gold method_ is to be followed, it is necessary that the
cartilage should be perfectly fresh; whilst if any of the other staining
agents are to be employed the tissue may have been previously preserved
in alcohol. An excellent object on which to demonstrate the gold process
is to be found in the articular cartilage of bone. It is a very easy
matter to obtain from the butchers the foot of a sheep which has just
been killed. The joint is to be opened, and the bones dissociated, when
they will be seen to have their extremities coated with a white
glistening membrane—this is the _articular cartilage_. Exceedingly thin
slices must be at once cut from it, and as only small sections are
required, a sharp razor may be used for the purpose, the blade being
either dry or simply wetted with distilled water. The sections as cut
are to be transferred to a small quantity of a half per cent. solution
of chloride of gold in a watch glass. Chloride of gold may be purchased
in small glass tubes hermetically sealed, each tube containing 15
grains, and costing about 2s. If, however, the student requires only a
small quantity of the staining fluid he need not be even at this small
expense, for as photographers for the requirements of their art always
keep on hand a standard solution of chloride of gold of the strength of
one per cent., a little of this may readily be obtained, and diluted to
the required degree. After the sections have been exposed to the action
of the staining fluid for about ten minutes they may be transferred to a
small beaker of distilled water, and exposed to diffused light for about
twenty-four hours, when they must be mounted in glycerine (§ 16).

Sections of cartilage may also be examined, without being stained, in
which case the field of the microscope should be only very feebly
illuminated. Or carmine staining (§ 14) may be resorted to—these
sections show well in glycerine, or if the staining be made very deep,
even Canada balsam may be employed, and with fair results.

Microscopists are indebted to Dr. Frances Elizabeth Hoggan for the
description of a new method of staining, which we have found especially
suited to the treatment of cartilage. The agent employed is _iron_, and
the process, which is very simple, is as follows. Two fluids are
necessary—(1) tincture of steel; (2) a two per cent. solution of
pyrogallic acid in alcohol. A little of the former is to be poured into
a watch glass, and into this the sections, after having been previously
steeped in alcohol for a few minutes, are to be placed. In about two
minutes the iron solution is to be poured away and replaced by solution
No. 2. In the course of a minute or two the desired depth of colour will
have been produced, when the sections are to be removed, washed in
distilled water, and mounted in glycerine. The results obtained by this
process are very beautiful, the colour produced being a very fine
neutral tint, of delightful softness. The process also answers admirably
in the case of morbid tissues, and we have now in our possession some
sections of ulcerated cartilage tinged by the iron method, in which the
minute changes resulting from the ulcerative disintegration are brought
out with wonderful distinctness.

As the structure of cartilage differs according to its purpose and
situation, the student will find his time profitably employed in a
careful examination of the following forms (α) _hyaline_—articular and
costal; (β) yellow fibro-cartilage—epiglottis, or external ear; (γ)
_cellular_—ear of mouse. Sections of the _intervertebral_ ligaments
should also be made, in which the different kinds of cartilage may be
examined side by side with each other.

29. _Coffee Berry_ affords sections of great beauty. The _unroasted_
berry should be soaked for hours or days in cold water until
sufficiently soft; then imbedded in paraffine, and cut in the microtome
(§ 12), the section being made in the direction of the long axis of the
berry. Put up in glycerine, or stain rather strongly with carmine, and
mount in balsam. The same method of treatment may also be applied to
other hard berries or _seeds_.

30. _Fat._—Adipose tissue may be hardened in alcohol, cut in paraffine,
and mounted in glycerine. If the tissue has been injected the sections
may be mounted in balsam, and are then very beautiful objects, showing
the capillary network encircling the fat cells.

31. _Hair._—Longitudinal sections are readily made by splitting the hair
with a sharp razor. It is more difficult to cut the hair transversely.
This, however, may easily be done in the following manner. The hairs
having previously been well soaked in æther to remove all fatty matters,
a sufficient number of them must be selected to form a bundle about the
thickness of a crow quill. This bundle, after being tied at each
extremity with a bit of thread, is to be immersed for several hours in
strong gum (§ 18,) to which a few drops of glycerine have been added. On
removal, the bundle must be suspended by means of a thread attached to
one end of it, in a warm place until sufficiently hard, when it is to be
imbedded and cut in paraffine (§ 12). Each section, as cut, is to be
floated off the knife into methylated spirit. From this it is with the
aid of the spoon (§ 14) to be transferred to a slide, the spirit tilted
off, a drop of absolute alcohol added, when, after a minute or two, this
also is to be drained off, the section treated with clove oil, and the
mounting completed as described in § 23.

32. _Horn_ varies very much in consistence, in some instances having a
cartilaginous character, whilst in others it is almost bony. In the
latter case, sections will have to be ground down in the manner
explained when speaking of bone (§ 26). Where the texture is less dense,
recourse may be had to prolonged steeping in hot or boiling water; in
some cases it will be necessary to continue the immersion for several
hours. When sufficiently soft the piece of horn may, by means of bits of
soft wood, be firmly wedged into the tube of the microtome, and sections
cut with a razor, or what is better, with a broad and very sharp chisel.
The sections are to be put between glass slips, held together by
American clips (or pegs), and put away for two or three days in order to
become thoroughly dry. After well soaking in good turpentine or benzole,
they must be transferred to slides, the superfluous turpentine drained
off, and chloroform-balsam added, etc. (§ 23). Sections of horn should,
of course, be cut in different directions, but for examination with the
polariscope those cut transversely yield by far the most magnificent
results. _Hoofs_, _whalebone_, and allied structures should also be
treated by the above method.

33. _Intestine._—The method to be pursued with _sections_ has already
been described (§ 18). The ileum, however, is a very pretty object when
a portion of it is so mounted as to show the _villi erect_. To do this
it is necessary to cement to the slide, by marine glue, a glass cell of
sufficient depth. This should have been prepared some time beforehand,
so that the cement may be perfectly dry and hard. The cell is now to be
filled with turpentine, and the piece of ileum (having been previously
passed through methylated spirit and absolute alcohol into turpentine)
is gently placed into it, having the villi uppermost; pour some pure and
rather fluid balsam on the object at one end, and gradually incline the
slide, so as to allow the turpentine to flow out at the opposite side of
the cell, till it is full of balsam. Then take a clean cover, and having
placed upon it a small streak of balsam from one end to the other, allow
it gradually to fall upon the cell, so as to avoid the formation of
air-bubbles (§ 17), and finish the slide in the usual manner.[15] Or,
the intestine may be dried, and mounted _dry_, in a cell with a
blackened bottom, for examination as an opaque object.

Footnote 15:

  Ralf.

34. _Liver._—Small pieces of liver may be very successfully hardened by
immersion in alcohol, beginning with weak spirit and ending with
absolute alcohol. Cut and mount as usual.

35. _Lung_ must be prepared in chromic acid (§ 5). For the cutting of
sections the freezing microtome (§ 18) is of especial value, and should,
therefore, be used. If, however, the student be not provided with this
instrument, he must proceed as follows. A small piece of lung,
previously deprived of all spirit, is to be immersed until thoroughly
saturated in solution of gum (§ 18). A small mould of bibulous paper (§
2), only just large enough to receive the piece of tissue, having been
prepared and filled with the mucilage, the specimen is to be transferred
to it. The mould, with its contents, is now to be placed in a saucer,
into which a mixture of about 6 parts of methylated spirit and 1 part of
water (_Schäfer_) is to be poured until the fluid reaches to within
about a third of the top of the paper mould. In the course of several
hours the surface of the mucilage will begin to whiten and solidify. As
soon as this occurs more dilute spirit must be poured into the saucer,
until the mould is completely submerged. In a day or two the gum will be
found to have acquired a suitable consistence for cutting, when it must
be removed from the spirit, the paper mould peeled off, and the mass
imbedded and cut in paraffine, the sections being afterwards treated as
if they had been obtained by the freezing method (§ 18). If the
solidification of the gum should proceed too slowly, a few drops of pure
spirit may be added to the contents of the saucer. If, on the other
hand, the gum should become overhard, it will be necessary to put into
the saucer a few drops of water, and repeat this until the required
consistence be obtained.

36. _Muscle._—Harden in chromic acid, and cut in paraffine. Transverse
sections may be made to show the shape of the fibrils. Longitudinal
sections will only be required in the case of injected tissues, when
such sections will be found very elegant, showing, as they do, the
elongated meshes of capillaries running between and around the muscular
fasciculi. Mount in glycerine or balsam. To see the transverse striæ
characteristic of voluntary muscle, a very good plan is to take a bit of
pork (cooked or fresh), and by means of needles to teaze it out into the
finest possible shreds. If these be examined in water or glycerine, the
markings will be shown very perfectly.

37. _Orange-peel_, common object though it be, is not to be despised by
the microscopist. Transverse sections must be prepared by the gum method
(§ 35). These sections are not to be subjected to the action of alcohol
(as this would destroy the colour), but after _drying_ between glass
slides they must be soaked in turpentine and mounted in balsam. We shall
then have a good view of the large globular glands whose office it is to
secrete that essential oil upon which the odor of the orange depends.

38. _Ovary_ may be prepared in the same manner as liver (§ 34).
Sections, which are to be cut in paraffine, may be stained with carmine,
and mounted in glycerine or balsam. Apart from all scientific value, we
know of no slide for the microscope which, even as a mere object of
show, surpasses in beauty a well-prepared section of _injected_ ovary,
showing the wondrous Graafian vesicles, surrounded by their meandering
capillaries.

39. _Porcupine Quill._—Soften in hot water, cut in paraffine, and mount
in balsam. Much (in our opinion _too_ much) lauded as an object for the
polariscope.

40. _Potato._—From the large amount of water which it contains thin
sections cannot be cut from the potato in its natural state. It must,
therefore, be partially desiccated, either by immersion in methylated
spirit for a few days or by exposure to the air. Sections may then
readily be obtained by imbedding and cutting in paraffine. Such sections
mounted in balsam are very beautiful, the starch being seen _in sitú_,
whilst if polarized light be employed each granule gives out its
characteristic black cross.

41. _Rush_ is to be prepared and cut as orange-peel (§ 37). Transverse
sections of this “weed” furnish slides of the most exquisite beauty.

42. _Skin._—To prepare skin for section a piece is to be selected which,
after having been boiled for a few seconds in vinegar, must be stretched
out on a bit of flat wood, and being maintained in position by pins be
allowed to remain until thoroughly dry. Then imbed in paraffine, and cut
_exceedingly_ thin transverse sections. These may be stained in carmine,
but more beautiful results are obtained if picro-carmine be employed.
Sections of skin, when stained by this agent are much increased both in
beauty and instructiveness; for the several constituents of the tissue
becoming tinged with different colours are readily distinguishable from
each other, whilst the contrast of colouring forms a pleasing picture to
the eye. The method of preparing picro-carmine is very simple, though it
sometimes yields a solution not altogether satisfactory. The best
formula with which we are acquainted is that given by Rutherford,[16]
and if due care be taken in following it out failure will generally be
avoided. “Take 100 c.c. of a saturated solution of picric acid. Prepare
an ammoniacal solution of carmine, by dissolving 1 gramme in a few c.c.
water, with the aid of excess of ammonia and heat. Boil the picric acid
solution on a sand bath, and when boiling add the carmine solution.
Evaporate the mixture to dryness. Dissolve the residue in 100 c.c.
water, and filter. A clear solution ought to be obtained; if not, add
some more ammonia, evaporate, and dissolve as before.” Sections may be
exposed to the action of this fluid for a period varying from fifteen to
thirty minutes, then rapidly washed in water, and mounted in glycerine.
They may also be mounted in balsam, care being taken in that case to
shorten as much as possible the period of their immersion in alcohol, so
that no risk may be run of the picric acid stain being dissolved out.

Footnote 16:

  “Practical Histology,” 2d edit. p. 173.

If it is intended to study the structure of the skin with anything like
thoroughness, portions must of course be examined from different
localities, in order that its several varieties and peculiarities may be
observed. Thus the _sudoriforous_, or sweat glands, may be found in the
sole of the foot, whilst the _sebaceous_ glands are to be sought in the
skin of the nose. The _papillæ_ are well represented at the tips of the
fingers,[17] whilst the structure of the shaft of the _hair_, together
with that of the follicle within which its root is enclosed, as also the
muscles by which it is moved, are to be studied in sections of skin from
the scalp or other suitable locality.

Footnote 17:

  It is well, in connection with these papillæ, to bear in mind a fact
  pointed out by _Frey_, namely, that the tips of the fingers frequently
  become, _post-mortem_, the seat of extensive natural injections;
  hence, in sections from this region, we frequently obtain good views
  of distended capillaries without having been at the trouble of
  previously injecting them.—_Frey_, “Microscopical Technology.”

43. _Spinal Cord._—The spinal cord, say of a cat or a dog (or if
procurable, of man), after being cut into pieces about half an inch in
length, may be hardened in the usual chromic acid fluid (§ 5). As it is
peculiarly liable to overharden and become uselessly brittle, the
process must be carefully watched. Its further treatment is the same as
that of brain. These sections may be stained very satisfactorily by the
_ink process_, for communicating details of which we are indebted to the
kindness of Dr. Paul, of Liverpool. The agent usually employed is
Stephenson’s blue-black ink, which, for this purpose, must be quite
fresh. As in the case of carmine, two methods of staining may be
adopted—either rapid, by using concentrated solutions, or more
prolonged, according to degree of dilution. For the reasons previously
given (§ 14), slow methods of staining are always to be preferred, as
yielding the most beautiful results, yet, for the purposes of
preliminary investigation, it is often convenient to have recourse to
the quick process. To carry out the latter plan, an ink solution of the
strength 1 in 5—10 parts of water is to be freshly prepared, and the
sections exposed to its action for a few minutes. For gradual staining
the dilution must be carried to 1 in 30—50, and the time of immersion
prolonged to several hours, the sections being occasionally examined
during the staining, so that they may be removed just as they have
acquired the desired tint. When a satisfactory coloration has been
obtained, the preparations should be mounted in dammar or balsam (§ 23).
One advantage of this method of staining is, that definition is almost
as good by artificial light as by day.

44. _Sponge_ may readily be cut after being tightly compressed between
two bits of cork; or its interstices may be filled up by immersion
either in melted paraffine (§ 11) or in strong gum (§ 18), and then cut
as usual.

45. _Stomach_ requires no special method of hardening (chromic acid).
Sections should always, when practicable, be cut in the freezing
microtome. In default of this, proceed in the manner as directed for
lung (§ 35). Both vertical and horizontal sections will, of course, be
required. If the preparation has been injected, the latter are
particularly beautiful. Stain with carmine or aniline blue (§ 27), and
mount—if for very close study, in glycerine—if injected and for a “show”
slide, use balsam.

46. _Tongue._—Harden in chromic acid, imbed and cut transverse sections
in paraffine. As, however, the paraffine is apt to get entangled amongst
the _papillæ_, whence it is afterwards with difficulty dislodged, it
will be as well before imbedding to soak the tongue in strong gum for a
_few minutes_, and afterwards immerse in alcohol till the gum becomes
hardened, so that the delicate papillæ may thus be protected from the
paraffine by a surface-coating of gum. The best staining agent is
picro-carmine (§ 42). Sections of _cat’s_ tongue near the root, when
thus stained, furnish splendid objects. Sections should also be made of
the _taste-bulbs_, found on the tongues of rabbits. These are small oval
prominences, situated one on each side of the upper surface of the
tongue near its root. They should be snipped off with scissors, and
vertical sections made in the direction of their long axis. Stain with
carmine or picro-carmine, and mount in glycerine or balsam.

47. _Vegetable Ivory_.—After prolonged soaking in cold water may readily
be cut in the microtome. The sections should be mounted in balsam, and
though not usually regarded as polariscopic objects, nevertheless, when
examined with the _selenite_, yield very good colours.

48. _Wood._—Shavings of extreme thinness may be cut from large pieces or
blocks of timber, by means of a very sharp plane. In this way very good
sections may be procured of most of the common woods, as oak, mahogany,
“glandular wood” of pine, etc. Where however, the material to be
operated upon takes the form of stems, roots, etc., of no great
thickness, they should, after having been reduced to a suitable
consistence (§ 4), be imbedded in paraffine, and cut in the microtome.
Before imbedding it must not be forgotten to immerse the wood to be cut
in weak gum-water (§ 11), this precaution being of great importance,
especially in the case of stems, etc., the bark of which is at all rough
and sinuous. If the sections are to be mounted _unstained_, they are
usually put up in weak spirit (§ 26). A very general method also of
dealing with this class of objects is to mount them _dry_ (§ 26). This
plan, however, cannot be recommended, for however thin the sections may
be, the outlines, when this process is adopted, always present a
disagreeable black or blurred appearance. To avoid this we may have
recourse to Canada balsam, but the ordinary method of employing it must
be slightly modified, a drop of chloroform being substituted for the
clove oil (§ 23), otherwise this latter agent will cause the section to
become so transparent as to render minute details of structure difficult
to recognize. A better plan, perhaps, is to stain the section with
carmine or logwood, and mount in balsam by the ordinary process. The
best course to follow, however, especially in the case of transverse
sections, is the _double staining_ method.[18] For this purpose the
sections in the first place must be subjected to the action of a
solution of chloride of lime (1/4 oz. to a pint of water) until they
become thoroughly bleached. They must then be soaked in a solution of
hyposulphite of soda (one drachm to four ounces of water) for an hour,
and after being washed for some hours, in several changes of water, are
to be transferred for a short time to methylated spirit. Some red
staining fluid is now to be prepared by dissolving half a grain of
Magenta crystals in one ounce of methylated spirit. A little of this
solution being poured into a small vessel of white porcelain (§ 14), the
sections are to be immersed in the dye for about thirty minutes. They
are now to be removed, and after _rapid_ rinsing in methylated spirit to
remove all superfluous colour, they must be placed in a blue staining
fluid made by dissolving half a grain of aniline blue in one drachm of
distilled water, adding ten minims of dilute nitric acid and afterwards
sufficient methylated spirit to make two fluid ounces. The sections must
be permitted to remain in this solution for a very short time only, one
to three minutes being generally sufficient, for as the action of the
dye is very energetic, it will, if too long exposure be allowed,
completely obliterate the previous coloration by the magenta. After
being again _rapidly_ rinsed in methylated spirit, as much of this as
possible must be drained off, and the sections put into oil of
_cajeput_, whence, in an hour, they may be transferred to spirits of
turpentine, and after a short soaking, mounted in balsam.

Footnote 18:

  See a paper by Mr. Styles in the “Pharmaceutical Journal,” also
  “Monthly Microscopical Journal” for August, 1875. [For a very
  exhaustive paper on this subject by the late Dr. Beatty, of Baltimore,
  Md., see “American Journal of Microscopy” for June, 1876.

If the student will carefully carry out the above process, his trouble
will be amply repaid by the beautiful results obtained, for by its means
he may, with ease, prepare for himself a series of slides of such value
as to constitute a worthy addition to his cabinet.

The preceding list by no means represents all the objects, sections of
which will be found interesting to the microscopic student. Such was not
its purpose—had it been so, the enumeration might have been prolonged
almost indefinitely. The end in view was to bring under the notice of
the reader only those substances the cutting of which is accompanied by
difficulty; and even of this class the space at our disposal has been so
limited that we have been unwillingly compelled to pass over many, and
dwell only on such as possess a typical character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 NOTES.

                               ----------

                           NOTE A., Page 14.

RANGOON oil is not found in this market. It is a variety of naphtha or
petroleum found at Rangoon, in Asia, and contains a variable percentage
of solid paraffin. Kerosene with a very little paraffin dissolved in it,
would undoubtedly answer the same purpose.

Good sperm oil or tallow (free from salt) will serve quite as well. It
is scarcely necessary to caution the reader that all oily matter should
be removed from the knife before it is used for cutting sections. This
is best effected by dipping it in hot water and carefully wiping it.

                           NOTE B., Page 15.

METHYLATED spirit is alcohol which contains a small percentage of
methyl. This renders it unfit for use in the manufacture of liquors or
even chloroform, but does not injure it as a preservative fluid. The
scientific men of Great Britain have the privilege of obtaining this
fluid free from duty, and consequently they make very general use of it.
In this country the student of science has no such privilege, and must
use the more expensive alcohol. This however is but of a piece with
other restrictions placed upon scientific pursuits in this country,
where men like Marshall Jewell and Hannibal Hamlin have influence enough
to pass laws which prohibit the exchange by mail of microscopic
specimens, which pass freely in every other civilized country.

True methyl alcohol, or methylated spirits, is not to be had in this
country, and therefore whenever this liquid is directed to be used in
English books the American microscopist must substitute good alcohol.
What is sold for “methyl alcohol” is wood spirit or wood naphtha, and
will not serve the purposes of the microscopist, though it answers well
enough for spirit lamps, making varnishes, etc.

                           NOTE C., Page 20.

THE method described in the text is generally known as the “free-hand”
method, and although it is not generally employed for the production of
cabinet specimens or slides that are intended for sale, yet it possesses
so many advantages that every student should endeavor to acquire the art
of cutting sections without the use of the microtome. For purposes of
study such sections are quite equal to the best of those usually found
on sale, and for the encouragement of beginners we may add that we have
seen sections cut by the free-hand method which for size, thinness and
accuracy, excelled any that we have ever seen produced with the
microtome. Indeed Schäffer distinctly affirms that no microtome can
equal the skilled hand in the production of thin sections.

                           NOTE D., Page 22.

THE mere existence of a binding screw should be no objection, and where
bushings are employed it is sometimes necessary. But as the author well
observes, a binding screw cannot be used to secure histological
preparations.

                           NOTE E., Page 22.

A STILL better system is where the section-knife is held in a frame
which slides on the plate so that the edge is kept just above the
surface. In this way the edge of the knife is never dulled by grinding
on glass or metal. A common mistake in this form, however, is to raise
the cutting edge too far above the surface of the plate. This gives rise
to great irregularities.

                           NOTE F., Page 22.

AS the size of the sections which it may be desired to cut, varies
within wide limits, the best microtomes made in this country are
furnished with as many as three tubes or “bushings,” fitting one within
the other, and in this way the hole may be partially filled up and thus
reduced in size. This enables us to obtain a range of from one inch and
a quarter, suitable for large histological preparations, to one-eighth
of an inch for such objects as hair sections.

                           NOTE G., Page 37.

                      KNIVES FOR CUTTING SECTIONS.

SUCCESS in cutting sections depends more upon the excellence of the
knife that is used than upon any other one point, and therefore the art
of keeping the knife in good order is one which should be acquired by
every microscopist, even at the cost of considerable time, study and
labor. As a stepping stone to the acquisition of this art, there are
certain general principles which must be thoroughly understood before we
can hope for success in practice. These principles are simple, and when
once clearly stated, quite obvious, but they are frequently overlooked.

Cutting instruments act in two ways—either as simple wedges or as a
series of wedges, the latter being generally known as the saw-like
action. It is frequently stated in school philosophies that the edges of
_all_ cutting instruments are toothed like a saw, and that they act like
a saw; this is evidently not the case with many, such as the axe, the
chisel, the plane, etc., and it is not even true of several to which it
is frequently applied, such as the razor, the penknife, etc. The action
can be said to be “saw-like” only when the teeth act as independent
wedges and remove a small portion of the substance acted upon, the
portion being known as _saw-dust_. Now in cutting sections of wood with
a sharp razor, where but a single stroke is used to carry the cutting
edge across a section, say half an inch in diameter, the edge of the
razor does not act like a saw; none of the material is removed except
the section itself; in other words, there is no saw-dust. That the edge
of the knife or razor is not even, is very easily proved by means of the
microscope, but it will be found that the notches and projections form a
series of lancet-shaped knifelets, each one of which acts just as does
the blade of a penknife when drawn over a piece of wood or a quire of
paper. Now if we lay a quire of paper on a board and draw the edge of a
penknife over it, we will cut down through the paper, not by sawing but
by a moving wedge. It is precisely in this way that the little
lancet-shaped teeth on the edge of a razor act when the latter is used
to cut a section.

If we further examine the edge of the razor, we will find that the
bottoms of the notches are comparatively blunt; if therefore we press
the razor directly forward we soon press these blunt portions of the
general edge against the material to be cut, and the resistance becomes
so great that the material is actually crushed or torn. This would not
happen if we had an absolutely perfect edge—one without any notches.
This being practically unattainable, however, we must endeavor to make
up for it by a sawing motion, (though not a sawing action) at the same
time seeking to avoid as much as possible those saw-like features which
render this motion necessary. We have dwelt at length upon this point
because so much has been written comparing the edge of a razor to that
of a saw, that some persons actually advise us to give the edges of our
knives and razors a saw-like character, under the impression that by so
doing they will work better. This is a fallacy; the best work will be
obtained from the smoothest and most perfect edge, provided the latter
is thin enough.

If the material of which our cutting instruments are made would allow
it, that is to say if it was perfectly hard, perfectly rigid and
incapable of being crushed or torn apart, the proper shape of a cutting
instrument would be a wedge of the most acute form possible. But since
the steel which we use is limited in its hardness and its power of
resisting crushing and bending influences, the blades of our knives must
have a certain strength or thickness, depending upon the character of
the material to be cut. For very hard substances the knife must be stout
and the edge ground to a comparatively obtuse angle; for moderately soft
substances, such as wood, the angle may be more acute, while for very
soft tissues the thinnest blade and the sharpest edge are most suitable.


    [Illustration: Fig. 1.]


The various angles to which cutting tools of different kinds are ground
are shown in the accompanying illustrations, which explain themselves.


    [Illustration: Fig. 2.]


In the diagrams just given, the sides of the wedge are carried in
straight lines to the very edge. In practice, however, this is never
done, there being two strong objections to such a form. In the first
place if the sides were as shown in the figures, every time the tool was
ground or set, the entire side would have to be ground off, and this
would involve great labor. But another difficulty, quite as great, would
occur in the use of the instrument, for since the wedge keeps growing
constantly and proportionately thicker, the friction between the sides
of the wedge and the material would rapidly become very great. Therefore
most cutting edges are ground to a second angle, much more obtuse than
the first, and it is this second angle which forms the true cutting
edge. And it is obvious that the mass of material required to carry out
the ultimate angle in any case is wholly unnecessary, for if the tool be
strong enough at _a b_ (Fig. 2) it will certainly be strong enough at _c
d_. An extreme illustration of this principle is shown in the cold
chisel used for cutting iron, the edge of which is shown in Fig. 2, and
the angle of 80° to which it is ground is carried out by dotted lines.
The angle which the sides of the chisel (not the sides of the extreme
cutting edge however) make with each other is 25°.


    [Illustration: Fig. 3.]


    [Illustration: Fig. 4.]


There are two methods by which this change of angle may be made, one of
which is shown in the cold chisel just figured, and the other in the
razor of which a section is shown in figures 3 and 4. In the case of the
cold chisel it will be seen that the tool is first formed to a thin
straight wedge which is afterwards changed to one that is much more
blunt. This answers very well where the ultimate angle is comparatively
large or blunt, as is the case with penknives, table-knives,
carving-knives, etc. But where the ultimate angle is very small this
plan does not answer well, and the method shown in Fig. 3 is generally
adopted. Here the ultimate angle is such that lines touching the extreme
edge and the back of the blade are perfectly straight and form the
actual cutting angle. In this case, therefore, the relief is obtained by
hollowing out the sides of the blade, and this is done to various
extents, the extremes being shown in figures 3 and 4. Fig. 3 shows a
section of a razor ground on a stone 12 inches in diameter, which is as
large as is generally used for this purpose. Fig. 4 is a section of a
razor ground on a four-inch stone—the smallest in general use. This
method of changing the angle is of course substantially the same as the
first, merely differing in the mechanical device used, but it affords
this important advantage that in the subsequent honing and stropping
processes the back of the razor forms a perfect guide by which the
ultimate angle may be determined. This is not the case with the cold
chisel or the carving-knife, in both of which cases the eye and hand
alone determine the cutting angle, which is therefore apt to become
irregular or even rounded—the worst form of all. This will be more
easily understood from the following engravings where A, Fig. 5, shows a
penknife blade, as applied to an oilstone for the purpose of giving it
the final edge. The angle here shown is considerably greater than that
generally used, but the principle is the same. It is evident that if, in
moving the blade back and forth on the stone we allow it to rock or
change the angle which the blade makes with the stone’s surface, the
edge will become rounded as shown in Fig. 6—a form which for delicate
work is useless.

If the blade be laid down flat as at B, Fig. 5, the labor of wearing
away the superfluous metal will be enormous. But if the blade be hollow
as Fig. 7, (where the hollow is, for clearness of illustration, slightly
exaggerated) then the ultimate angle may be formed quickly and
accurately, there being no danger of the angles being changed on account
of want of skill on the part of the operator.


    [Illustration: Fig. 5.]


    [Illustration: Fig. 6.]


    [Illustration: Fig. 7.]


    [Illustration: Fig. 8.]


In some cases one side is left quite flat and the other side is ground
to two or sometimes three angles, as in the carpenter’s chisel, a
section of which is shown in Fig. 8, where _a a_ shows the angle made by
the body of the blade; _b b_ the angle of the bevel formed by the
grindstone, and _c c_ the angle of the cutting edge which is formed by
the oilstone. In this case the flat side A B forms a straight guide and
enables the workman, in cutting, to make straight, clean work. In
sharpening such a tool on the oilstone the flat side is always laid flat
on the oilstone and merely smoothed off,[19] and the skill of the
workman is chiefly shown in the accuracy with which he forms the angle
_c_ B _c_. The dexterity with which skilled workmen can effect this by
the hand alone is astonishing, but in the hands of those who have had
but little practice the edge infallibly becomes rounded as shown in Fig.
6. Therefore wherever a knife with a flat side is used, no attempt
should ever be made to grind this flat side on the hone. Such an attempt
will almost always result in an edge so irregular that it will be almost
impossible to cut a good section with it. But if the under side of the
knife be left truly flat, we will have the very best tool that can be
had for use with the microtome. Unfortunately, however, it is very
difficult to get a knife with a truly flat surface, that is, one that is
perfectly “out of wind” as mechanics say. As a general rule the flat
sides of knives are not true planes but irregularly curved surfaces;
consequently when laid on a plane surface, such as the table of a
microtome, they rock, and the edge is in contact with the table at some
points and separated from it at others, and the points which are in
contact change as the knife is moved diagonally across the table. This
makes the section irregular and worthless. But a really good knife with
a perfectly true flat side is such a valuable tool that a good deal of
effort may be profitably expended in getting it, and when once obtained
never let the flat side be touched by a grindstone, or more than touched
by a hone. It is not absolutely necessary, however, that the sides of a
delicate knife should be curved, provided the knife is used for cutting
very soft materials. An angle of 10° or even 5° gives a pretty stout
blade when carried back three-quarters of an inch, as may be seen by
examining Fig. 1, and the guiding action of the very thick back may be
obtained by means of an artificial guide, applied like the brass backs
of tenon saws. Such an arrangement is shown in Fig. 9, and has been
found very effectual.

Footnote 19:

  Holtzapffel tell us that chisels that are required for paring across
  the end grain of moderately soft wood are considered to hang better to
  the work when they have a very slight keen burr or wire edge thrown up
  on the face or flat side of the tool. But this does not apply to
  section knives.

When the knife is to be honed, the back is applied and fastened by means
of two or three set screws. When laid on the hone, the edge of the knife
and the lower surface of the back form the guide and regulate the
cutting angle. In this way we can use a broad, thin blade and yet secure
great accuracy in honing it. Such a blade has this advantage also, that
it is not so liable to be rounded and thus injured by stropping as one
in which the relief is obtained by hollowing out the sides.


    [Illustration: Fig. 9.]


Such, then, are the general principles which govern the construction of
cutting tools, including the section knives used by microscopists. We
will now give a few practical directions for selecting a knife and
putting and keeping it in order.

In selecting a knife for cutting sections, regard must be had to the
texture of the material that is to be cut. To attempt to cut delicate
sections of soft tissues with the stout knives which are suitable for
cutting sections of woody fibre would be to destroy the sections, while
to reverse the operation and cut sections of wood with thin, delicate
knives would result in the ruin of the knife. We have seen a most
excellent knife seriously injured by an attempt to cut material that was
too hard for it. The knife was very thin, and had proved most excellent
in cutting sections of such material as kidney, liver, etc. An attempt
was made, against our protest, to cut a section of an apple-shoot, the
wood of which was mature. Before the knife had gone half way across, it
bent, dug into the wood and broke, leaving an ugly gap in the middle.
Experienced section-cutters know this very well, but young microscopists
are not so familiar with the facts just stated, and the point is too
important to be overlooked. Those, therefore, who devote themselves to
microscopical studies, or who expect to make sections of materials of
several kinds, differing in hardness, etc., must provide themselves with
knives of different degrees of strength.

For common work, good razors are as good as anything, provided they can
be obtained with straight edges. Where razors are not suitable, recourse
must be had to the surgical instrument maker, though we are sorry to say
that there are but few in this country that know how to forge, temper
and grind a decent knife. Most of our dealers in instruments do not make
the instruments they sell; they import the goods they sell with their
names stamped on, and thus get a reputation as manufacturers; a special
order they are unable to fill respectably. There are some exceptions,
but of the majority of dealers what we have written above is true.

The points which specially demand attention in a knife for cutting
sections are these: 1. Quality of the steel used; 2. Temper; 3. Form of
the blade.

Of the quality of the material of which a knife is made, nothing can be
determined except by actual trial. The old tests of staining with acids,
examining with the microscope, etc., are worthless, or at least too
crude and uncertain to be of any practical value. Color changes with the
degree of polish that is produced, and, in short, there is no reliable
guide. The purchaser must depend entirely upon the reputation of the
manufacturer. There is plenty of good steel to be found; the trouble
lies with the cutlers. They are careless and in haste, and as a
consequence they burn the steel or fail to work it sufficiently, and the
result is a useless tool.

The steel may be of the very best quality, however, and well forged, and
yet the knife may fail from being badly tempered—too soft or too hard.
If too soft, the edge is soon dulled; the knife requires to be
frequently honed, and the time wasted in keeping it in order is a
serious drawback. If too hard, it is impossible to give it a keen edge,
for the metal crumbles away as soon as it is honed or stropped very
thin, and the edge becomes ragged and dull. Good steel, well forged, may
be so tempered that it will neither crumble nor become rapidly dull.

Much may be learned on this point from careful inspection of the edge,
and trial on a piece of horn, such as an old razor handle. When drawn
over a clean piece of horn once or twice the edge of a soft knife is
completely dulled; if well-tempered it should scarcely lose its
keenness. Again, when laid flat on the thumb nail and pressed, the edge
ought to bend up without breaking or crumbling, and at once, when the
pressure is removed, resume its original shape. The extent to which
extreme hardness and durability, or toughness, may be combined, is well
shown in the famous Toledo sword-blades. One of these blades will shear
through an iron nail without having its edge perceptibly dulled, and yet
so tough and springy is it that it may be coiled up into a hoop of
several folds without breaking or receiving any permanent set. If we
could only get section knives of stuff like this, it would be a pleasure
to work with them.

After all, however, the only test of these two points, material and
temper, is a fair trial in actual practice. Of the form of the blade,
however, it is easy to judge, and there are a few points which are
frequently overlooked and which give rise to errors that are attributed
to other causes.

In the text we are told that “It is essentially necessary that the back
and edge of the blade be strictly parallel to each other.” The author
undoubtedly knew what the correct form should be, but the definition he
has given is not a correct mathematical statement of the conditions
involved. These are as follows:

_The edge must form a straight line, and both the edge and the under
side of the back must lie in the same plane._

Let us consider these conditions somewhat carefully.

Since the hole in which the material to be cut is imbedded, is always
circular, and since the blade is generally pressed forcibly against the
table of the microtome, it is obvious that if the edge of the knife be
curved it will sink into the hole to a greater or less depth according
as it is further from the centre of the hole or nearer to it. To explain
this let us refer to the greatly exaggerated drawing given in figure 10
where the edge of the knife, _a_, _b_, is shown in two different
positions covering the hole of the microtome. The least degree of
reflection will show that as the knife passes towards the centre from _a
b_ to _aʹ bʹ_, it will have a tendency to turn on the back as on a
hinge, and the middle of the edge will sink deeper into the hole as it
approaches the centre of the latter. The section will therefore vary in
thickness and prove useless. This difficulty can be obviated only by the
use of a straight edge like _e f_, which will always lie in the same
plane.


    [Illustration: Fig. 10.]


If the knife were perfectly rigid, and the curved edge and back lay
entirely in the same plane, this difficulty would not occur to any great
extent. But since a curved edge rarely lies wholly in the plane of the
back of the knife, and since the blades of most knives, especially those
thin ones used for cutting sections of soft tissues, yield a little to
pressure, and since this pressure is never exactly the same, it is
impossible to prevent irregularities from occurring.

While it is not necessary that the back of the knife and the cutting
edge should be parallel to each other, it is absolutely necessary that
they be in the same plane, or, as mechanics say,—“out of wind.” If this
condition be not observed, the blade will rock on the microtome table as
it passes over it, and irregularity in thickness of section will result.

A slight knowledge of geometry will enable any one to see that these
statements are strictly accurate.

As regards other points in the form of the knife, we refer to what has
been previously said when discussing the general principles which should
govern the construction of cutting tools.

We now proceed to give a few practical directions for sharpening knives
and razors and keeping them in order.

Section knives, during the process of sharpening, are subjected to three
distinct processes: 1, Grinding; 2, Honing; 3, Stropping.

Grinding is one of the most important, though it is probable that it
will rarely be undertaken by the microscopist himself. More knives and
razors are spoiled in grinding than in any other way. We have now in our
possession an excellent knife, which in an evil hour we entrusted to a
New York cutler, and received it back utterly ruined, the temper being
entirely taken out of the blades! Some of our readers may wonder at
this, but unfortunately it is too true. The cutler, to save time and
trouble, too frequently holds the blade against the stone with such
force that it becomes over-heated, especially when he is a little
careless and allows the supply of water to fall short.[20] The owner
does not find this out until he discovers that the knife is ruined,
because nothing is more easy than to cool the blade and grind off the
tell-tale blue spots. When charged with his rascality, the cutler always
denies it and lays the blame on a “soft spot in the steel”—a miserable
subterfuge—too transparent to deceive the least experienced.

Footnote 20:

  Nothing is more easy than to heat a thin rod or stout wire red hot by
  holding it against a dry grindstone rapidly revolving. We have often
  kindled fire in this way.

The only protection against this is either to entrust the knife to a man
of known carefulness and integrity, or to stand over him while he does
it. If the knife be ground under the owner’s eye, no fear need be
entertained, because it is easy to insist upon the use of plenty of
water.

The grindstone used for section knives should be of fine grain, and it
should run true and be very straight across the face, otherwise it will
be impossible to grind the knife true, and this, as we have seen, is a
necessity.

Every microscopist that expects to do much at cutting sections must
learn to hone his own knife or razor. Of the various hones in use the
famous Turkey oilstone is said to be altogether the best. It is,
however, very difficult to get it genuine and in sufficiently large
pieces. We therefore use the German hone-slate, a softer, yellow stone
of wonderful fineness and cutting power. The ordinary whetstones are
altogether too coarse, and as for artificial stones and strops, they may
do for coarse work and common razors for _scraping_, but they will not
do for knives used for section-cutting. If any of our readers should be
so fortunate as to possess a good, old-fashioned Turkey oilstone with a
fair sized surface, let them think much of it. It is invaluable. Years
ago, when working on some investigations that required the use of very
sharp knives, we were offered, by an old English carpenter, the use of a
real Turkey stone. We have never since found anything that did its work
so quickly and so well.

To merely mention the substitutes for Turkey oilstone would fill some
pages. We therefore confine ourselves to the German hone. It is obtained
from the slate mountains in the neighborhood of Ratisbon, where it
occurs in the form of a yellow vein running vertically into the blue
slate, sometimes not more than an inch in thickness, and varying to
twelve to eighteen inches. After being quarried it is sawed into thin
slabs, which are usually cemented to a similar slab of the blue slate as
a support, and the combined stones are then set in a wooden frame and
fitted with a cover, also of wood. Unlike the Turkey oilstone, the
Arkansas stone, and some others, the German hone is soft and easily
scratched and worn. It must therefore be carefully preserved, and as the
_flatness_ of the hone is an important point, it should never be used
for anything but section knives.

Having purchased a hone, the first thing to do is to see that it is
perfectly true; that is, that its surface is a perfect plane. If hollow
or twisted, it is useless until made straight. It may be tested by means
of two steel or wood straight-edges, and the method of doing this, which
is very simple but difficult to describe, the microscopist can learn
from any cabinet maker or carpenter. If the hone be not true it must be
made so, and this is best done by grinding it with emery on a slab of
marble or, better still, a plate of cast iron which has been planed
true. (Waste castings with planed surfaces may be found in most machine
shops, and may be either borrowed or purchased for a small sum.) If the
hone is very uneven, coarse emery may be used at first; then finer must
be taken, and so on until the surface of the hone is not only true but
very smooth. This involves considerable labor, but it cannot be avoided
if a _true_ edge as well as a sharp one is desired, and hence our advice
to use the hone for nothing but section knives. Accuracy in a penknife
or a razor for shaving is of no consequence; in a section-knife it is a
_sine qua non_.

The surface of the hone must not only be true and smooth, it must also
be clean and free from dust and grit, a single particle of which may
spoil the work of hours. It should therefore, when not in use, be kept
constantly covered. It is always used with oil, and this oil should be
of a kind that does not readily dry up. Good sperm is excellent, and so
is purified neat’s-foot oil. Avoid kerosene, soap and water, and similar
fluids, which are so frequently recommended, especially under the guise
of new discoveries. They have all been tried and found wanting. After
use, the stone should be carefully wiped clean, fresh oil being applied
when it is next used. It must never be used without a liberal supply of
oil, otherwise it will become glazed and will no longer act on the
steel.

The hone being in good order, the blade is laid flat on it and moved
over its surface with circular sweeps. The method of doing this is
easily acquired, and is best learned by watching an expert cutler at
work. If we could only hit it, the perfection of this operation would be
to wear down the sides of the blade until they just met; they would then
form a keen and perfect edge. Unfortunately we cannot always hit this
point exactly; we are apt to overdo the matter just a little, and then
comes up the _bête noir_ of beginners—the “wire edge.” This is caused by
the metal of the blade bending away from the hone as soon as it becomes
of a certain degree of thinness. Once it does this it cannot be worn off
by the hone, and the only way to remove it is to draw the edge of the
knife or razor across a piece of horn or hard wood. After removing the
wire edge in this way, give the blade one or two sweeps on the hone and
then strop it. If the blade be very soft, the wire edge comes very
quickly and easily, and is very hard to get rid of. On very hard blades
the wire edge is not so apt to make its appearance. It comes, however,
on very excellent blades. It may be avoided in a measure by driving the
blade edge-first over the hone, and indeed the blade should always be
sharpened most in this way. And since the backward and forward strokes
are always nearly equal, as regards space passed over, this is
accomplished by exerting a greater pressure on the forward than on the
backward stroke.

This wire edge is a nasty thing when it breaks off on the hone. Unless
removed it will very speedily ruin a fine knife, therefore look out for
it and wipe off the hone carefully if you have any suspicion that
particles of steel have broken off the blade and got on to it.

In honing, as in everything else, however, nothing but practice will
impart skill, and he who intends to become an expert should practice on
a few old razors, grinding, honing and stropping them himself, until he
has acquired the art of giving them an edge far keener than most of the
razors ordinarily used for shaving.

The last operation to which the knife is subjected is that of stropping,
and as the blade should be stropped after every section, it becomes
important that our tools should be good and that we should know how to
use them. By having two or three knives we can always avoid grinding and
honing the blades ourselves, for it is then easy to hire the work done,
and half a dozen knives will last a careful worker a long time with
merely the aid of a good strop. But the strop he must use himself.
Fortunately no great skill is required in stropping, but the strop must
be a good one and is best home-made.

Our readers have doubtless seen the “Cheap John” strop-vendors take a
rough table knife, strop it on one of their “patent” strops and cut a
hair with it. Nevertheless such a knife, sharpened in that way, would
not cut good sections, and such a strop is not just the thing for giving
the finishing touch to a section-knife, even though the label does say
that it is “intended for surgical instruments.”[21]

Footnote 21:

  The finest emery paper, glued on a strip of wood and used as a strop,
  will impart to a razor an edge sufficiently keen to enable it to
  remove the beard, and if paper three or four degrees coarser be used,
  a very dull knife or razor may be sharpened, and afterwards stropped
  on the finer emery until it is keen enough to cut a hair. But it will
  be found that cutting edges produced in this way are not smooth enough
  for section-cutting.

The strop should never be used with the intention of removing metal so
as to thin the edge of the knife. This is the proper function of the
hone, and those who depend most on the hone and least on the strop, will
always succeed best. The strop is used in the first place for
_smoothing_ off the edge, and in the second for removing that incipient
dullness which always comes from even the slightest use. It is true that
in the latter case the strop trespasses somewhat on the functions of the
hone, but only to a very slight extent, and stropping should never be
carried so far as to require more than a very few strokes.


    [Illustration: Fig. 11.]


    [Illustration: Fig. 12.]


The best material for a strop is good calf-skin, well tanned, and firmly
glued to a strip of wood with the hair side out. The leather should be
hard, otherwise it will rapidly round the edge of the knife. The way in
which this occurs is readily understood from figures 11 and 12. In Fig.
12 the leather is seen to rise up behind the edge of the blade as the
latter passes over it, so that instead of two plane facets meeting at an
angle of from 15° to 20° as left from the hone, (Fig. 12) the edge has
become considerably rounded and the ultimate angle of the cutting edge
is nearly or quite doubled. The hardest and firmest leather should
therefore be chosen, avoiding of course any leather that has been made
hard and unpliable by the action of water or other agents. Two sides
will be found enough for a strop. On one the leather should be kept
clean, while the other should be thoroughly impregnated with fine
grained, but very hard rouge or crocus.[22] Rouge is an artificial oxide
of iron prepared by exposing sulphate of iron to heat. The hardness of
the resulting powder depends upon the temperature to which it has been
exposed, and this temperature is very well indicated by the color which
the rouge assumes. Bright red or crimson rouge is soft and will not cut
steel; hard rouge, suitable for polishing steel, is purple in color, and
this quality should therefore be chosen. Great care should be taken to
see that it is free from gritty particles, and it should be well rubbed
into the leather in a dry state. All mixtures of grease and oil with
abrasive substances should be eschewed. If the leather be of good
texture and the rouge hard and fine, a very few strokes will suffice to
impart the last degree of smoothness and keenness to the blade.

Footnote 22:

  Rouge may be purchased from dealers in watch-makers’ tools. Those who
  cannot procure it readily may very easily prepare it for themselves.
  Full directions may be found in the “Amateur’s Handbook.” New York:
  Industrial Publication Company.

Since grit and dust would soon spoil the strop, it should be kept
carefully covered and protected. The rouge will require occasional
renewing, which may be done by sprinkling a little lightly over the
surface and rubbing it in with the finger. Consequently we find that the
best and most convenient holder for rouge is a bottle with some fine but
porous fabric tied over the mouth of it, forming as it were a sort of
dredge. Over the bottle mouth and its cover should be tied a paper cap
to keep out dust.

We have thus endeavored to give, in as simple a manner as possible, such
information as will guide the microscopist to the acquisition of skill
in this most important but generally despised department of his art. We
are told by the biographer of Swammerdam that a great deal of his
success was to be attributed to his skill in sharpening his fine knives
and scissors. The same is also stated of other noted workers, and yet
none give even the slightest directions to the novice who desires to
follow in their footsteps. There is not to our knowledge a single book
in the English language which treats fully of this subject, with perhaps
the exception of Holtzapffel’s work on “Mechanical Manipulation,” and
this has long been out of print. As previously stated, however, it is
only by practice that the necessary finger-skill can be acquired, but
this skill is well worth acquiring at any cost. The man who depends upon
cutlers and knife grinders will never make satisfactory progress.

                                NOTE H.

We are inclined to believe that the difficulty of enclosing glycerine
does not arise from the dissolving action of this liquid, so much as
from the great adhesiveness which exists between it and glass. Oily
cements are of course attacked by glycerine, but shellac and several
other gums are insoluble, and drying oils, if well oxidized are also
insoluble. Where cells are used they must be first firmly attached to
the clean slide, and the cement should also be brought into direct
contact with the clean cover. Glycerine does not evaporate at ordinary
temperatures, and consequently wherever the slide or cover is soiled
with it, no cement will ever adhere until the glycerine has been wiped
off. There is no prospect of its drying.

                            NOTE I. Page 48.

The solution here referred to, and which is known as Kleinenberg’s
solution, is made in the following way:

(1.) Make a saturated solution of crystallized calcium chloride in 70
per cent. alcohol, and add alum to saturation. (2.) Make also a
saturated solution of alum in 70 per cent. alcohol. Add (1) to (2) in
the proportion of 1:8. To the mixture add a few drops of a saturated
solution of hæmatoxylin in absolute alcohol.

This solution may be used in very many cases for staining sections, in
place of the ordinary watery solution of logwood alum. It may, if
required, be diluted with the mixture of 1 and 2. The stained sections
are placed at once in strong spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 INDEX.

 Acetic acid, 38
 Adipose tissue, 63
 Æther microtome, 24
 Air-bubbles, 40, 55, 62
 Alcohol, 17, 19
   absolute, 54

 Balsam, Canada, 46, 51
   to clean from slide, 55
 Beale’s carmine fluid, 33
 Bell’s cement, 41
 Blue staining fluid, 60
 Bone, 16, 57
   decalcified, 58
 Bottles for media, &c., 48
 Brain, 59
 Brunswick black, 41

 Capillary attraction, 55
 Carmine staining, 32
 Carpenter, Dr., 37, 41
 Cartilage, 60
 Cells, to make, 59
 Centring slide, 38
 Chloroform-balsam, 51, 54
 Chromic acid, 17
 Clove oil, 51, 54
 Coffee berry, 62
 Cover, applying, 37
   German plan, 39
 Crochet-needle holders, 39

 Double staining, 73
 Dry mounting, 58, 65, 72

 Fat, 63
 Finishing slide, 54
 Fibro-cartilage, 62
 Freezing method, 42-47
 Fresh tissues, to cut, 15-17
 Fruit stones, 58

 Gardner, Mr., 25, 31
 Gelatine cement, 41
 Glycerine, 37, 38
 Gold staining, 58
 Gum, imbedding in, 22, 66
   strong, 43
   weak, 31, 71

 Hair, 63-69
 Hæmatoxylon, _see_ Logwood
 Hand-sections, 19
 Hardening agents, 19
 Hoggan, F. Elizabeth, Dr., 61
 Hone, 26, 57
 Horn, hoofs, &c., 16, 64
 Hyaline cartilage, 62

 Ice, for freezing, 43
 Injections, to harden, 19
 Ink staining, 70
 Intestine, 42, 43, 64
 Iron staining, 61

 Kay, J. A., Mr., 52
 Kidney, 17
 Klein’s _lifter_, 35
 Knife, section, 25, 30

 Leaves, &c., to cut, 12
 Ligaments, intervertebral, 62
 Lime, carbonate of, 37
 Liver, 65
 Logwood staining, 47
 Lung, 43, 65

 Martindale’s logwood fluid, 47
 Media, mounting, 38
 Methylated spirit, _see_ Alcohol
 Microtome, 21
   choice of, 22
 Microtome, employment of, 29
   freezing, 43, 44
   imperfection in, 23, 46
   Rutherford’s, 31
 Muscle, 66

 Needles, microscopical, 39

 Orange-peel, 67
 Ovary, 67

 Papillæ of finger, 69
 Paraffine, adhering to sections, 27
   imbedding in, 20, 26
   mixture, 26
   _rising_ in tube, 23
   shrinks in cooling, 29
 Paul, Dr., 70
 Pathological specimens, 19, 62
 Picro-carmine, 59, 68, 72
 Porcupine quill, 67
 Potato, 67
 Preparation of animal tissues, 16
   vegetable tissues, 15
 Prussian blue pigment, 38

 Rangoon oil, 14, 47
 Razors, 20, 26, 29, 30
 Rush, 78
 Rutherford’s microtome, 24, 31
   “Practical Histology,” 43

 Salicylic acid, 44
 Salt, for freezing, 45
 Schäfer’s “lifter,” 35
   “Practical Histology,” 48
 Scissors, section, 13
 Sebaceous glands, 69
 Section-cutter, _see_ Microtome
 Section-knife, 24
 Sections, thickness of, 31
   to dehydrate, 52
   to transfer, 33
 Seeds, 63
 Skin, 68
 Sperm oil, 44
 Spinal cord, 69
 Spirit lamp for balsam, 53
   weak, 36, 59
 Sponge, 71
 Spoon, section, 35, 54
 Staining agents, 31
 Strop, razor, 26, 29
 Stomach, 71
 Sudoriferous glands, 69

 Taste-bulbs, 71
 Teeth, 16, 58
 Tongue, 71
 Tubes, collapsible, 56

 Valentin’s knife, 14
 Vegetable ivory, 72
   tissues, to prepare, 12
 Vessels, porcelain, 33

 Water-bath, cheap, 29
 Whalebone, 64
 White zinc cement, 56
 Wood, 72

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                              =CATALOGUE=

                                   OF

                         Books and Periodicals

                       PUBLISHED AND FOR SALE BY

                  THE INDUSTRIAL PUBLICATION COMPANY,

                       _176 Broadway, New York_.

👉 _Any of these Books may be obtained from any Bookseller or Newsdealer,
or will be sent Free by mail to any part of the United States or Canada
ON RECEIPT OF PRICE._

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=The Amateur’s Handbook of Practical Information,=

    For the Workshop and the Laboratory. Second Edition. Greatly
    Enlarged. Neatly Bound 15 cents.

This is a handy little book, containing just the information needed by
Amateurs in the Workshop and Laboratory. Directions for making Alloys,
Fusible Metals, Cements, Glues, etc.; and for Soldering, Brazing,
Lacquering, Bronzing, Staining and Polishing Wood, Tempering Tools,
Cutting and Working Glass, Varnishing, Silvering, Gilding, Preparing
Skins, etc., etc.

The New Edition contains extended directions for preparing Polishing
Powders, Freezing Mixtures, Colored Lights for tableaux, Solutions for
rendering ladies’ dresses incombustible, etc. There has also been added
a very large number of new and valuable receipts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=Rhymes of Science: Wise and Otherwise.=

    By O. W. Holmes, Bret Hart, Ingoldsby, Prof. Forbes, Prof. J. W.
    McQ. Rankine, Hon. R. W. Raymond, and others.

    With Illustrations. Cloth, Gilt Title. 50 cents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=Section-Cutting.=

    A Practical Guide to the Preparation and Mounting of Sections for
    the Microscope; Special Prominence being given to the Subject of
    Animal Sections. By Sylvester Marsh. Reprinted from the London
    edition. With Illustrations. 12mo., Cloth, Gilt Title. 75 cents.

This is undoubtedly the most thorough treatise extant upon
section-cutting in all its details. The American edition has been
greatly enlarged by valuable explanatory notes, and also by extended
directions, illustrated with engravings, for selecting and sharpening
knives and razors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=Companion for Cheap Microscopes.=

    Intended for those who have absolutely no knowledge of the
    Microscope or how to use it. Price, in Boards, 30 cents. In Cloth,
    Gilt Title 50 cents.

This is a very elementary book, giving very simple directions for using
the Microscope, and for collecting, preparing and mounting objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=How to Use the Microscope.=

    A Simple and Practical Book, intended for beginners. By John Phin,
    editor of “The American Journal of Microscopy.” Second Edition.
    Greatly Enlarged, with 50 illustrations in the text and 4 full-page
    engravings printed on heavy tint paper. 12mo., Neatly bound in
    Cloth, Gilt Title. 75 cents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=The Microscope.=

    By Andrew Ross. Fully Illustrated. 12mo., Cloth, Gilt Title. 75
    cents.

This is the celebrated article contributed by Andrew Ross to the “Penny
Cyclopædia,” and quoted so frequently by writers on the Microscope.
Carpenter and Hogg, in the last editions of their works on the
Microscope, and Brooke, in his treatise on Natural Philosophy, all refer
to this article as the best source for full and clear information in
regard to the principles upon which the modern achromatic Microscope is
constructed. It should be in the library of every person to whom the
Microscope is more than a toy. It is written in simple language, free
from abstruse technicalities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=Diatoms.=

    Practical Directions for Collecting, Preserving, Transporting,
    Preparing and Mounting Diatoms. By Prof. A. Mead Edwards, M. D.,
    Prof. Christopher Johnston, M. D., Prof. Hamilton L. Smith, LL. D.

    12mo., Cloth. 75 cents.

This volume undoubtedly contains the most complete series of directions
for Collecting, Preparing and Mounting Diatoms ever published. The
directions given are the latest and best.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=Common Objects for the Microscope.=

    By Rev. J. G. Wood. Upwards of four hundred illustrations, including
    twelve colored plates by Tuffen West.

    Illuminated Covers. 50 cents.

This book contains a very complete description of the objects ordinarily
met with, and as the plates are very good, and almost every object is
figured, it is a most valuable assistant to the young microscopist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=Five Hundred and Seven Mechanical Movements.=

    Embracing all those which are Most Important in Dynamics,
    Hydraulics, Hydrostatics, Pneumatics, Steam Engines, Mill and Other
    Gearing, Presses, Horology and Miscellaneous Machinery; and
    including Many Movements never before published, and several of
    which have only recently come into use. By Henry T. Brown, editor of
    the “American Artisan.” Eleventh Edition. $1.00.

This work is a perfect Cyclopædia of Mechanical Inventions, which are
here reduced to first principles, and classified so as to be readily
available. Every mechanic that hopes to be more workman, ought to have a
copy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=The Six Days of Creation.=

    The Chemical History of the Six Days of Creation. By John Phin, C.
    E., editor of “The American Journal of Microscopy.” 12mo., Cloth. 75
    cents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=Stories About Horses.=

    Just the Book for Boys. With eight full-page engravings. In Boards,
    25 cents. In Cloth 50 cents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=Shooting on the Wing.=

    Plain Directions for Acquiring the Art of Shooting on the Wing. With
    Useful Hints concerning all that relates to Guns and Shooting, and
    particularly in regard to the art of Loading so as to Kill. To which
    has been added several Valuable and hitherto Secret Recipes, of
    Great Practical Importance to the Sportsman. By an Old Gamekeeper.

    12mo., Cloth, Gilt Title. 75 cents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=The Pistol as a Weapon of Defence,=

    In the House and on the Road.

    12mo., Cloth. 50 cents.

This work aims to instruct the peaceable and law-abiding citizens in the
best means of protecting themselves from the attacks of the brutal and
the lawless, and is the only practical book published on this subject.
Its contents are as follows: The Pistol as a Weapon of Defence.—The
Carrying of Fire-Arms.—Different kinds of Pistols in Market; How to
Choose a Pistol.—Ammunition, different kinds; Powder, Caps, Bullets,
Copper Cartridges, etc.—Best form of Bullet.—How to Load.—Best Charge
for Pistols.—How to regulate the Charge.—Care of the Pistol; how to
Clean it.—How to Handle and Carry the Pistol.—How to Learn to
Shoot.—Practical use of the Pistol; how to Protect yourself and how to
Disable your antagonist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=Lightning Rods.=

    Plain Directions for the Construction and Erection of Lightning
    Rods. By John Phin, C. E., editor of “The Young Scientist,” author
    of “Chemical History of the Six Days of the Creation,” etc. Second
    Edition. Enlarged and Fully Illustrated.

    12mo., Cloth, Gilt Title. 50 cents.

This is a simple and practical little work, intended to convey just such
information as will enable every property owner to decide whether or not
his buildings are thoroughly protected. It is not written in the
interest of any patent or particular article of manufacture, and by
following its directions, any ordinarily skilful mechanic can put up a
rod that will afford perfect protection, and that will not infringe any
patent. Every owner of a house or barn ought to procure a copy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=Instruction in the Art of Wood Engraving.=

    A Manual of Instruction in the Art of Wood Engraving; with a
    Description of the Necessary Tools and Apparatus, and Concise
    Directions for their Use; Explanation of the Terms Used, and the
    Methods Employed for Producing the Various Classes of Wood
    Engravings. By S. E. Fuller.

Fully illustrated with Engravings by the author, separate sheets of
engravings for transfer and practice being added.

New Edition, Neatly Bound. 30 cents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=What to Do in Case of Accident.=

    What to Do and How to Do It in Case of Accident. A Book for
    Everybody. 12mo., Cloth, Gilt Title. 50 cents.

This is one of the most useful books ever published. It tells exactly
what to do in case of accidents, such as Severe Cuts, Sprains,
Dislocations, Broken Bones, Burns with Fire, Scalds, Burns with
Corrosive Chemicals, Sunstroke, Suffocation by Foul Air, Hanging,
Drowning, Frost-Bite, Fainting, Stings, Bites, Starvation, Lightning,
Poisons, Accidents from Machinery, and from the Falling of Scaffolding,
Gunshot Wounds, etc., etc. It ought to be in every house, for young and
old are liable to accident, and the directions given in this book might
be the means of saving many a valuable life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            BOUND VOLUMES OF

                The Technologist, or Industrial Monthly.

The eight volumes of THE TECHNOLOGIST, or INDUSTRIAL MONTHLY, which have
been issued, form a Mechanical and Architectural Encyclopædia of great
value; and, when properly bound, they form a most important addition to
any library. The splendid full-page engravings, printed on tinted paper,
in the highest style of the art, are universally conceded to be the
finest architectural and mechanical engravings ever published in this
country. We have on hand a few complete sets, which we offer for $16.00,
handsomely and uniformly bound in cloth.

We have also a few extra sets of Vols. III to VIII inclusive. These six
volumes we offer for $8.00 bound in cloth. As there are but a very few
sets remaining, those who desire to secure them should order
immediately.

NOTE.—The above prices do not include postage or express charges. The
set weighs altogether too much to be sent by mail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




Just Published. 1 Vol., 12mo. Neatly Bound in Cloth, Gilt Title. Price
75 cents.

                       HOW TO USE THE MICROSCOPE.

          A Simple and Practical Book, intended for beginners.

                             BY JOHN PHIN,

           _Editor of “The American Journal of Microscopy.”_

  Second Edition. Greatly Enlarged, with 50 illustrations in the text,
        and 4 full-page engravings printed on heavy tint paper.

                               CONTENTS:

WHAT A MICROSCOPE IS.—Different Kinds of Microscopes.—Simple
Microscopes.—Hand Magnifiers.—The Coddington Lens.—The Stanhope
Lens.—Raspail’s Microscope.—The Excelsior Microscope.—Twenty-five cent
Microscopes and how to make them.—Penny Microscopes.

COMPOUND MICROSCOPES.—Different kinds of Objectives.—Non-Achromatic
Objectives.—French Achromatic Objectives.—Objectives of the English
Form.—Immersion Objectives.—Focal Lengths corresponding to the numbers
employed by Nachet, Hartnack and Gundlach.

HOW TO CHOOSE A MICROSCOPE.—Microscopes for Special Purposes.—Magnifying
Power required for different purposes.—How to judge of the quality of
the different parts of the Microscope.

ACCESSORY APPARATUS.—Stage Forceps, Animalcule Cage, etc.

ILLUMINATION.—Sun Light.—Artificial Light.—Bulls-Eye Condenser.—Side
Reflector.—The Lieberkuhn.—Axial Light.—Oblique Light.—Direct Light.

HOW TO USE THE MICROSCOPE.—How to Care for the Microscope.

HOW TO COLLECT OBJECTS.—Where to find Objects.—What to Look for.—How to
Capture Them.—Nets.—Bottle-Holders.—Spoons.—New Form of Collecting
Bottle.—Aquaria for Microscopic Objects.—Dipping Tubes.

THE PREPARATION AND EXAMINATION OF OBJECTS.—Cutting Thin Sections
of Soft Substances.—Sections of Wood and Bone.—Improved
Section-Cutter.—Sections of Rock.—Knives.—Scissors.—Needles.—Dissecting
Pans and Dishes.—Dissecting Microscopes.—Separation of Deposits from
Liquids.—Preparing whole Insects.—Feet, Eyes, Tongues, Wings, etc.,
of Insects.—Use of Chemical Tests.—Liquids for Moistening
Objects.—Refractive Power of Liquids.—Covers for Keeping out
Dust.—Errors in Microscopical Observations.

PRESERVATION OF OBJECTS.—General Principles.—Recipes for Preservative
Fluids.—General Rules for Applying them.

MOUNTING OBJECTS.—Apparatus and Materials for: Slides, Covers, Cells,
Turn-Table, Cards for Making Cells, Hot-Plate, Lamps, Retort Stand,
Slide-Holder, Mounting Needles, Cover Forceps, Simple Form of Spring
Clip, Centering Cards, Gold-Size, Black Japan, Brunswick Black, Shellac,
Bell’s Cement, Sealing Wax Varnish, Colored Shellac, Damar Cement,
Marine Glue, Liquid Glue, Dextrine.—Mounting Transparent Objects
Dry.—Mounting in Balsam.—Mounting in Liquids.—Mounting of Whole
Insects.—How to Get Rid of Air-Bubbles.—Mounting Opaque Objects.

FINISHING THE SLIDES.

 May be obtained from any Bookseller or News Agent, or will be sent by
                mail, postage paid, on receipt of price.

                  THE INDUSTRIAL PUBLICATION COMPANY,

              P. 0. Box 4875.      176 Broadway, New York.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         _GENESIS AND GEOLOGY._

                             --------------

                          THE CHEMICAL HISTORY

                                   OF

                       The Six Days of Creation.

                          BY JOHN PHIN, C. E.,

            EDITOR OF “THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY.”

                  _1 Vol., 12mo._ _Cloth._ _75 cents._

                             --------------

         The following are a few of the Opinions of the Press:

This is a small book, but full of matter. * * * We think this book is
full of interest and value; and as the discussions concerning the
harmony of science and faith are rife at the present day, we commend the
reasonings of Mr. Phin to the great number of readers and students who
are investigating these subjects.—_The Presbyterian_ (Philadelphia).

The author gives a new solution of this difficult question, and
certainly presents many very plausible arguments in support of his
theory.—_Sunday-School Workman._

A very candid and ingenious essay.—_Christian Union_ (H. W. Beecher’s
paper).

No one can read this book without compensation, without becoming more
thoughtful concerning the phenomena of creation; and he need lose none
of his reverence for the supremacy of the Divine Law.—_Rural New
Yorker._

We could say much in commendation of Prof. Phin’s little book. An
intelligent reader can hardly fail to be interested in it, and many
might be benefited.—_Country Gentleman._

The book can not fail to interest even those who do not fully accept the
theory it advocates.—_Boston Journal of Chemistry._

It is a new scientific view of the matter.—_Phrenological Journal._

The book, although not large, will prove exceedingly interesting to all
who have ever directed attention to this matter, and contains more solid
and suggestive thought than many voluminous treatises on the
subject.—_Insurance Monitor._

The work is ingenious and original, and presents many striking
suggestions.—_American Baptist._

We believe Prof. Phin has started upon the correct basis, and his theory
is mainly tenable. His views are presented in a manner which, though
terse, is easily comprehended.—_Daily Guardian_ (Paterson, N. J.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          THE YOUNG SCIENTIST,

                   A Practical Journal for Amateurs.

            =ISSUED MONTHLY.      Price 50 Cents per year.=

It is characteristic of young Americans that they want to be DOING
something. They are not content with merely _knowing_ how things are
done, or even with _seeing_ them done; they want to do them themselves.
In other words, they want to experiment. Hence the wonderful demand that
has sprung up for small tool chests, turning lathes, scroll saws, wood
carving tools, telegraphs, model steam engines, microscopes and all
kinds of apparatus. In nine cases out of ten, however, the young workman
finds it difficult to learn how to use his tools or apparatus after he
has got them. It is true that we have a large number of very excellent
text-books, but these are not just the thing. What is wanted is a living
teacher. Where a living teacher cannot be found, the next best thing is
a live journal, and this we propose to furnish. And in attempting this,
it is not our intention to confine ourselves to mere practical
directions. In these days of knowledge and scientific culture, the “Why”
becomes as necessary as the “How.” The object of the YOUNG SCIENTIST is
to give clear and easily followed directions for performing chemical,
mechanical and other operations, as well as simple and accurate
explanations of the principles involved in the various mechanical and
chemical processes which we shall undertake to describe.

The scope and character of the journal will be better understood from an
inspection of a few numbers, or from the list of contents found on a
subsequent page, than from any labored description. There are, however,
three features to which we would call special attention:

CORRESPONDENCE.—In this department we intend to place our readers in
communication with each other, and in this way we hope to secure for
every one just such aid as may be required for any special work on hand.

EXCHANGES.—An exchange column, like that which has been such a marked
success in the _Journal of Microscopy_, will be opened in the Young
Scientist. Yearly subscribers who may wish to _exchange_ tools,
apparatus, books, or the products of their skill, can state what they
have to offer and what they want, _without charge_. Buying and selling
must, of course, be carried on in the advertising columns.

ILLUSTRATIONS.—The journal will make no claims to the character of a
“picture book,” but wherever engravings are needed to make the
descriptions clear they will be furnished. Some of the engravings which
have already appeared in our pages are as fine as anything to be found
in the most expensive journals.

                            Special Notice.

As our journal is too small and too low-priced to claim the attention of
news dealers, we are compelled to rely almost wholly upon subscriptions
sent directly to this office. As many persons would no doubt like to
examine a few numbers before becoming regular subscribers, we will send
four current numbers as a trial trip for

                             FIFTEEN CENTS.

                             --------------

                                 CLUBS.

Where three or more subscribe together for the journal, we offer the
following liberal terms:

                           3 copies for  $1.25
                           5   〃    〃     2.00
                           7   〃    〃     2.75
                          10   〃    〃     3.50

Advertisements, 30 cents per line.

As postal currency has nearly disappeared from circulation, we receive
postage stamps of the lower denominations (ones, twos and threes) at
their full value. Postal orders are, however, much safer and more
convenient. To avoid delay and mistakes address all communications to
“THE YOUNG SCIENTIST, Box 4875, New York,” and make all checks and
orders payable to John Phin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        =WHAT PEOPLE SAY OF US.=

In a letter to the Editor, Oliver Wendell Holmes, the genial “Autocrat
of the Breakfast Table,” says: “I am much pleased with the YOUNG
SCIENTIST. It makes me want to be a boy again.”

“It is a little publication, calculated to call out and educate all the
latent ingenuity and thirst for knowledge which the youthful mind
possesses, and we hope it will win its way into every household in the
land.”—[Scientific Press.

“We have never seen a periodical, designed for youth, which came nearer
to our ideal of what such a journal should be.”—[Canadian Pharmaceutical
Journal.

“The YOUNG SCIENTIST is one of the choicest publications for juvenile
minds in this country. Every page treats on subjects of importance to
young and old, portrayed in a clearly comprehensive manner, which at
once interests the young idea in its careful perusal.”—[Lapeer Clarion.

“It seems to fill the bill.”—[Newport Daily News.

“It is pleasing to note that its youthful subscribers will not be misled
by clap-trap advertisements or advertisements of patent medicines, which
will not be received at any price. The YOUNG SCIENTIST is doing good
work in setting its face against this class of humbugs.”—[Manufacturing
and Trade Review.

“The work is a copiously illustrated monthly, and is full of practical
hints that will instruct and amuse the young folks.”—[Industrial School
Advocate.

“A small but elegant and very instructive monthly.”—[Pittsburg
Chronicle.

“Contains the best possible reading for the young of both
sexes.”—[Ottawa Journal.

“We can safely recommend this magazine as one of the very best
publications for the young folks.”—[The Independent, Fenton, Mich.

“This journal occupies a new field, and is needed to put the minds of
our youth on the right track to secure a correct understanding of the
nature of things.”—[Wayland Press.

“It is ably edited by John Phin, who will make a large place in the
heart of the rising generation, if he persists in his venture. We hope
his success in the field will be equal to the article furnished—first
best.”—[Sunset Chimes.

“The articles are written in a popular, readable style, and profusely
illustrated.”—Akron City Times.

“The YOUNG SCIENTIST is excellent in conception, and well designed to
amuse and instruct young people.”—[Chicago Evening Journal.

“The YOUNG SCIENTIST is a handsome monthly magazine, each number
containing about 16 pages, handsomely illustrated. It will supply a
place which has been heretofore unoccupied. The copy before us comes
fully up to the promise of the prospectus.”—[The Times, Iroquois, Mich.

“It is a journal which should be in the hands of both young and old, and
is a great benefit to the young scientist as well as the advanced
professor. It is a thousand times more valuable than the dime novel
series, so much read by boys. Parents would do well to have it in their
households.”—[The Iron Home.

“This publication is a new launch, and it is very gratifying to witness
the ableness which pervades its pages.”—Amherst Free Press.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE AMERICAN

                         JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY,

                                  AND

                           _POPULAR SCIENCE_.

                             --------------

                              PROSPECTUS.

The object of the JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY is to diffuse a knowledge of the
best methods of using the Microscope; of all valuable improvements in
the instrument and its accessories; of all new methods of microscopical
investigation, and of the most recent results of microscopical research.
The JOURNAL does not address itself to those who have long pursued
certain special lines of research, and whose wants can be supplied only
by elaborate papers, which, from their thoroughness, are entitled to be
called monographs rather than mere articles. It is intended rather to
meet the wants of those who use the microscope for purposes of general
study, medical work, class instruction, and even amusement, and who
desire, in addition to the information afforded by text-books, such a
knowledge of what others are doing as can be derived only from a
periodical. With this object in view, therefore, the publishers propose
to make the JOURNAL so simple, practical and trustworthy, that it will
prove to the advantage of every one who uses the microscope at all to
take it.

ILLUSTRATIONS.—The JOURNAL will be freely illustrated by engravings
representing either objects of natural history or apparatus connected
with the microscope.

TRANSACTIONS OF SOCIETIES.—THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY is not the
organ of any Society, but it gives the proceedings of all Societies
whose officers send us a report. As the JOURNAL is devoted _wholly_ to
Microscopy, and is in good form and size for binding, no better medium
can be had for preserving the scientific records of any society. Matters
of mere business routine we are frequently obliged to omit for want of
room.

EXCHANGES.—An important feature of the JOURNAL is the exchange column,
by means of which workers in different parts of the country are enabled,
without expense, except for postage, to exchange slides and materials
with each other.

                                =TERMS.=

During the first two years of its existence, the subscription to the
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY was only fifty cents per year, but at the
request of more than two-thirds of the subscribers, the size of the
JOURNAL has been doubled, and the price raised to

                         =ONE DOLLAR PER YEAR.=

Four copies for three dollars. Those who wish to economize in the
direction of periodicals, would do well to examine our clubbing list.

FOREIGN SUBSCRIBERS.—The JOURNAL will be sent, postage paid, to any
country in the Postal Union for $1.24, or 5 shillings sterling per year.
English postage stamps, American currency or American postage stamps
taken in payment. In return for a postal order or draft for £1 5s., five
copies of the JOURNAL will be furnished and mailed to different
addresses. Make all drafts and postal orders payable to John Phin.

BACK VOLUMES.—We have on hand a few copies of Vols. I and II, bound in
handsome cloth cases, which we offer for $1 25 each. Vols. I and II,
bound, and the numbers of Vol. III, as issued, we offer for $2.50. We
can no longer supply complete sets of 1876-7 in sheets. To those who
wish to examine the journal, we will send ten odd numbers for 25 cents.

                           =Advertisements.=

The JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY, from its very nature, is a visitor to the
very best families, and its value as an advertising medium has therefore
proved to be much above that of average periodicals. A few select
advertisements will be inserted at the rate of 30 cents per line,
nonpariel measure, of which twelve lines make an inch. Address

                                         AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPY,
                                               P. O. Box 4875, New York.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Missing or obscured punctuation was corrected.
    ○ Typographical errors were silently corrected.
    ○ Inconsistent spelling was made consistent when a predominant form
      was found in this book; otherwise it was not changed.
    ○ Forms of the name Schäfer were regularized to match the title page
      of his “A Course of Practical Histology.”
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_);
      text that was bold by “equal” signs (=bold=).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Section-Cutting: A Practical Guide, by
Sylvester Marsh

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SECTION-CUTTING: A PRACTICAL GUIDE ***

***** This file should be named 55930-0.txt or 55930-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/9/3/55930/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Barry Abrahamsen, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
